Distinct cytokine patterns may regulate the severity of neonatal asphyxia—an observational study.


Background
Neuroinflammation and a systemic inflammatory reaction are important features of perinatal asphyxia. Neuroinflammation may have dual aspects being a hindrance, but also a significant help in the recovery of the CNS. We aimed to assess intracellular cytokine levels of T-lymphocytes and plasma cytokine levels in moderate and severe asphyxia in order to identify players of the inflammatory response that may influence patient outcome.


Methods
We analyzed the data of 28 term neonates requiring moderate systemic hypothermia in a single-center observational study. Blood samples were collected between 3 and 6 h of life, at 24 h, 72 h, 1 week, and 1 month of life. Neonates were divided into a moderate (n = 17) and a severe (n = 11) group based on neuroradiological and amplitude-integrated EEG characteristics. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were assessed with flow cytometry. Cytokine plasma levels were measured using Bioplex immunoassays. Components of the kynurenine pathway were assessed by high-performance liquid chromatography.


Results
The prevalence and extravasation of IL-1b + CD4 cells were higher in severe than in moderate asphyxia at 6 h. Based on Receiver operator curve analysis, the assessment of the prevalence of CD4+ IL-1β+ and CD4+ IL-1β+ CD49d+ cells at 6 h appears to be able to predict the severity of the insult at an early stage in asphyxia. Intracellular levels of TNF-α in CD4 cells were increased at all time points compared to 6 h in both groups. At 1 month, intracellular levels of TNF-α were higher in the severe group. Plasma IL-6 levels were higher at 1 week in the severe group and decreased by 1 month in the moderate group. Intracellular levels of IL-6 peaked at 24 h in both groups. Intracellular TGF-β levels were increased from 24 h onwards in the moderate group.


Conclusions
IL-1β and IL-6 appear to play a key role in the early events of the inflammatory response, while TNF-α seems to be responsible for prolonged neuroinflammation, potentially contributing to a worse outcome. The assessment of the prevalence of CD4+ IL-1β+ and CD4+ IL-1β+ CD49d+ cells at 6 h appears to be able to predict the severity of the insult at an early stage in asphyxia.




Neonatal asphyxia evokes the injury of the central nervous system (CNS) due to the severe lack of oxygen and perfusion during labor and delivery, resulting in moderate to severe neurological dysfunction. Asphyxia primarily affects term and post-term neonates. It occurs in 2–4 of every 1000 live-born term neonates and is responsible for approximately 23% of neonatal deaths worldwide [1]. While some surviving children show favorable neurological outcome, others sustain severe neurodevelopmental disabilities such as mental retardation, sensory impairment, cerebral palsy, and seizures [2]. Identifying the factors responsible for such extent of individual variability regarding outcome would be critical; however, to date, no definitive predictive factors have been validated.
Inflammation of the CNS, or neuroinflammation, is now recognized to be a feature of all neurological disorders, including that related to neonatal asphyxia. Microglia and astrocytes become activated and release pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Disruption of the blood-brain barrier allows infiltration of peripheral monocytes into the brain that further enhances the inflammatory response, leading to neuronal injury and apoptosis. However, the inflammatory reaction following asphyxia is not limited to the CNS, but can also be detected in the periphery. Systemic immune activation is characterized by increased synthesis of pro-inflammatory cytokines [3]. A key player in the mediation of the inflammatory response both in the brain and peripheral blood during asphyxia is the subset of T lymphocytes. T lymphocytes have a pivotal role in the evolution of hypoxic injury. The mechanisms by which T cells are neurotoxic include the production of perforin and granzyme B, the release of free radicals, the triggering of apoptotic pathways within neurons, and most importantly, the production of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines [4, 5].
An extensive dataset describes neuroinflammation to have detrimental consequences, but results have indicated over the past decade that some aspects of the inflammatory response are beneficial for the CNS outcomes [6, 7]. Benefits of neuroinflammation include neuroprotection, the mobilization of neural precursors for repair, remyelination, and axonal regeneration. In vitro studies demonstrated that pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α and IFN-γ, are toxic for oligodendrocytes [8–10]. Although inflammatory cytokines contribute to injury progression, they also play a vital role in the fast elimination of cellular debris, and in the processes of growth and repair, contributing to functional recovery [11, 12]. The results of Saliba et al. 