IL-2 and IL-15 dependent thymic development of Foxp3-expressing regulatory T lymphocytes.

Immunosuppressive regulatory T lymphocytes (Treg) expressing the transcription factor Foxp3 play a vital role in the maintenance of tolerance of the immune-system to self and innocuous non-self. Most Treg that are critical for the maintenance of tolerance to self, develop as an independent T-cell lineage from common T cell precursors in the thymus. In this organ, their differentiation requires signals from the T cell receptor for antigen, from co-stimulatory molecules, as well as from cytokine-receptors. Here we focus on the cytokines implicated in thymic development of Treg, with a particular emphasis on the roles of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and IL-15. The more recently appreciated involvement of TGF-β in thymic Treg development is also briefly discussed. Finally, we discuss how cytokine-dependence of Treg development allows for temporal, quantitative, and potentially qualitative modulation of this process.



Several populations of T lymphocytes with immunosuppressive activity have been identified to date (Josefowicz et al., 2012a; Kim and Cantor, 2011; Sakaguchi et al., 2010; Shevach, 2011; Vuddamalay and van Meerwijk, 2017; Xu et al., 2016). The most critical population of Treg expresses Foxp3: Humans and mice carrying mutations in the gene encoding this forkhead/winged helix transcription factor develop a rapidly lethal autoimmune and inflammatory pathology (Bennett et al., 2001; Brunkow et al., 2001; Fontenot et al., 2003). Treg therefore prevent the development of autoimmune pathology and chronic inflammation in interfaces with the environment such as the intestines, lungs, and skin.
As other T lymphocytes, activation of Treg requires that they recognize antigenic peptides presented by cell-surface expressed molecules encoded in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Autoimmune pathology develops upon activation of autospecific conventional T cells (Tconv) and suppression of these immune-responses involves autospecific Treg (Kieback et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2015). The antigen-specificity of Treg involved in the prevention of chronic inflammatory diseases remains less well defined, but antigens from commensals as well as from infectious agents are most certainly recognized. It therefore appears appealing to postulate that Treg preventing autoimmune pathology develop mostly in the thymus where autospecific T cell precursors can recognize self-antigens presented by thymic stromal cells (Klein and Jovanovic, 2011). It needs to be emphasized, however, that autospecific Treg can also differentiate from Tconv precursors in peripheral lymphoid organs (Sun et al., 2015). The Treg preventing chronic inflammation likely mostly differentiate in peripheral (lymphoid) organs where Tconv involved in immune-responses, and therefore specific for the agents that provoked the inflammation, differentiate into Treg under tolerogenic conditions (Bilate and Lafaille, 2012; Josefowicz et al., 2012b). Nevertheless, colonic Treg express T cell receptors for antigen (TCR) that were also found on thymic Treg, suggesting that Treg involved in the prevention of chronic inflammation may develop in the thymus (Cebula et al., 2013). Recent data showing that peripheral Treg recirculate back to the thymus and that they represent a very substantial proportion of thymic Treg in adult mice (Cowan et al., 2016; Thiault et al., 2015), however, urge for a reinvestigation of this issue.
In addition to signals via the TCR, cytokine signaling plays a central role in Treg differentiation in the thymus and the periphery. In this review, we focus on Treg development in the thymus and will discuss TCR- and cytokine receptor-derived signals. We will discuss how and where these distinct signals intersect to drive development of a Treg repertoire which efficiently protects the organism from autoimmune pathology.

Within the thymus two anatomically and functionally distinct compartments can be distinguished; the cortex and the medulla. Hematopoietic precursors enter the thymus at the cortico-medullary junction. During their differentiation, thymocytes will first migrate into the cortex, then back to the medulla before leaving the thymus at the cortico-medullary junction (Love and Bhandoola, 2011). Thymocytes acquire the expression of the heterodimeric TCRαβ. The genes encoding the TCR undergo random somatic rearrangements that allow for the generation of a wide repertoire of TCR capable of recognizing a vast variety of rapidly evolving infectious agents. Distinct TCR-based selection processes ensure that only functional and harmless T cells leave the thymus (Kurd and Robey, 2016; Lucas et al., 2016; Ohigashi et al., 2016).
In the thymic cortex, only thymocytes bearing a TCR with a certain affinity for peptide/MHC complexes presented by cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTEC) survive. This process, called positive selection, ensures the selection of developing