The Role of Reactive Oxygen Species in Regulating T Cell-mediated Immunity and Disease.

T lymphocytes rely on several metabolic processes to produce the high amounts of energy and metabolites needed to drive clonal expansion and the development of effector functions. However, many of these pathways result in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which have canonically been thought of as cytotoxic agents due to their ability to damage DNA and other subcellular structures. Interestingly, ROS has recently emerged as a critical second messenger for T cell receptor signaling and T cell activation, but the sensitivity of different T cell subsets to ROS varies. Therefore, the tight regulation of ROS production by cellular antioxidant pathways is critical to maintaining proper signal transduction without compromising the integrity of the cell. This review intends to detail the common metabolic sources of intracellular ROS and the mechanisms by which ROS contributes to the development of T cell-mediated immunity. The regulation of ROS levels by the glutathione pathway and the Nrf2-Keap1-Cul3 trimeric complex will be discussed. Finally, T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases exacerbated by defects in ROS regulation will be further examined in order to identify potential therapeutic interventions for these disorders.



Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are a class of highly unstable, oxygen-containing molecules including superoxide, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radicals (1). These molecules have the ability to scavenge electrons from fully reduced compounds in order to increase their own stability. Under normal conditions, endogenous ROS levels are tightly controlled by various antioxidant systems within the cell. However, as these reactive species collect electrons from various sources, they form even more free radicals, resulting in oxidative stress (1). During oxidative stress, ROS can damage DNA, proteins, and lipid-based membranes within the cell. The mutations caused by high levels of cellular ROS have been linked to the development of various cancers and disease states (1).
Despite the danger posed by high levels of these compounds, several studies have implicated moderate levels of ROS as critical mediators of intracellular signaling pathways in various cell types (2345). Because ROS levels are known to increase after T cell activation, a large body of research has emerged implicating ROS as important second messengers in T cell receptor (TCR) signaling. In this review, the role of metabolically-produced ROS in T cell-mediated immunity and its regulation by cellular antioxidant mechanisms will be discussed. Additionally, the development of T cell-driven autoimmunity as a consequence of dysregulated ROS production and signaling will be covered in greater detail.

Because the energetic requirements of T cells at each stage vary greatly, metabolic flux plays a key role in T lymphocyte maintenance and function. The metabolic pathways utilized by T cells are essential to produce the metabolites and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) necessary for proliferation and the development of effector functions. However, many of these processes generate ROS as a byproduct, and mitochondrial oxidative metabolism has long been known to be the main producer of ROS within the cell. In this section, the generation of ROS in T cells by oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle will be covered.

After T cell activation, signaling through the TCR stimulates the efflux of calcium ions from the endoplasmic reticulum (6). This calcium then enters the mitochondria, the major site of OXPHOS, and acts upon several enzymes involved in the TCA cycle, increasing their function and leading to the increased production of the redox coenzymes NADH and reduced flavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2). These coenzymes are the main drivers of the electron transport chain. During this process, NADH transfers electrons to complex I and FADH2 transfers electrons to complex II, both of which are located within the mitochondrial membrane (7). From complex I, the electrons are shuttled to complex III and complex IV via ubiquinone and cytochrome C, respectively. As electrons pass through each complex, protons are pumped across the mitochondrial membrane and into the intermembrane space, creating a proton gradient that provides the energy to drive ATP synthase (7). The electrons are finally transferred to O2, creating H2O as a byproduct of the reaction.
Despite the high efficiency of this process, evidence has shown that electrons can leak through the complexes involved in the electron transport chain to partially reduce O2, resulting in the production of superoxide radicals. Superoxide can then be converted to H2O2 by the superoxide dismutases, SOD1 and SOD2. The majority of this ROS production is believed to occur at complex III, as various inhibitors of complex III have been shown to reduce superoxide production (89)