Interleukin (IL)-6 Directs the Differentiation of IL-4–producing CD4+ T Cells.

Interleukin (IL)-4 is the most potent factor that causes naive CD4+ T cells to differentiate to the T helper cell (Th) 2 phenotype, while IL-12 and interferon γ trigger the differentiation of Th1 cells. However, the source of the initial polarizing IL-4 remains unclear. Here, we show that IL-6, probably secreted by antigen-presenting cells, is able to polarize naive CD4+ T cells to effector Th2 cells by inducing the initial production of IL-4 in CD4+ T cells. These results show that the nature of the cytokine (IL-12 or IL-6), which is produced by antigen-presenting cells in response to a particular pathogen, is a key factor in determining the nature of the immune response.


In response to pathogens, naive CD4+ T cells differentiate into effector Th1 and Th2 cells. Th1 cells produce IL-2, IFN-γ, and TNF-β, which are involved in cellmediated inflammatory reactions. Th2 cells secrete mainly IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, and IL-13, which mediate B cell activation, antibody production, and the regulation of Th1 responses (for review see reference 1). In general, a Th1 response helps eradicate intracellular microorganisms, whereas a Th2 response can control extracellular pathogens. Development of an inappropriate response can lead to ineffective immunity and may even be pathogenic. Thus, the factors that regulate the polarization to either a Th1 or Th2 immune response are critical, but remain unclear. The dose of antigen and the type of APC, and/or the co-stimulatory pathways (2–6), have been postulated to be some of the polarizing factors. However, the most effective inducer of CD4+ T cell differentiation appears to be the local cytokine environment. It is clear that the cytokine IL-12 directs differentiation to a Th1 phenotype (7, 8), while IL-4 can drive differentiation to a Th2 phenotype (9, 10).
If cytokines are indeed the driving force behind CD4+ T cell differentiation, where does the initial polarizing cytokine come from? Several findings suggest that during the initiation of a Th1 response, IL-12 is produced particularly by macrophages in response to certain microbial antigens, while NK cells are the main source of IFN-γ in response to IL-12 (7, 11). In the case of a Th2 response, the initial source of IL-4 is less clear, since none of the classical APCs make IL-4. Some non-APCs, such as mast cells and basophils, can produce IL-4, but these cells are not abundant in the lymphoid organs where T cell priming occurs (12). Recently, it has been shown that IL-4 is also produced by a minor subpopulation of T cells, the CD3+CD4+NK1.1+ cells, which may therefore have a role (13). However, the production of IL-4 by mast cells and basophils is a late event and it is not yet clear how the CD4+NK1.1+ cells become activated. An alternative possibility, however, is that other cytokines may induce the initial production of IL-4 by the CD4+ T cells; after this initial stimulus, the secreted IL-4 could act in an autocrine fashion, upregulating IL-4 production and inhibiting IFN-γ production, thereby polarizing the differentiation of Th2 cells.
In an attempt to find potential cytokines that, like IL-12, could be produced by classical APCs and could trigger the initial IL-4 production by CD4+ T cells, we analyzed the modulatory effects of IL-6, a cytokine involved in different aspects of the immune response and acute phase response (for review see references 14 and 15). Here we show that IL-6 is able to initiate the polarization of naive CD4+ T cells to effector Th2 cells by inducing the production of endogenous IL-4. In addition, IL-6 also antagonizes the IL-12– mediated differentiation of Th1 cells. We postulate that IL-6 is a key factor in the choice between a Th1 or Th2 immune response.

Total CD4+ T cells were isolated from spleen and lymph nodes from either wild-type B10.BR, wild-type C57BL/6J, or C57BL/6J-backcrossed IL-6–deficient mice by negative selection as previously described (16). The naive population (CD4+CD45RBhighCD44low) was purified from total CD4+ T cells obtained from cytochrome (Cyt)1 c TCR transgenic mice by staining with a red613-conjugated anti-CD4 mAb, a biotinylated anti-CD44 mAb, FITC-conjugated anti-CD45RB mAb, and PE-conjugated streptavidin (PharMingen, San Diego, CA) and cell sorting by using a FACSPLUS®. Mitomycin C-treated (50 μg/ml) syngeneic splenocytes were used as source of APCs.
Total or naive CD4+ T cells were cultured at 106 cells/ml in the presence of syngeneic APCs (5 × 105 cells/ml) with Con A (Boehringer Mannheim GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) or synthetic moth Cyt c peptide (Yale University, New Haven, CT) plus IL-6 (R&D Sys., Inc., Minneapolis, MN), IL-12 (provided by Genetics Institute, Cambridge, MA), or IL-4 (provided by DNAX, Palo Alto, CA). After 4 d, a 40–60% increase in the number of cells was observed in the different conditions. Effector Th cells were exhaustively washed, counted, and restimulated at