Autologous MUC1-Specific Th1 Effector Cell Immunotherapy Induce Differential Levels of Systemic TReg Cell Subpopulations That Result in Increased Ovarian Cancer Patient Survival.

Adoptive T cell immunotherapy using autologous lymphocytes is a viable treatment for patients with cancer and requires participation of Ag-specific CD4 and CD8 T cells. Here, we assessed the immunotherapeutic effects of autologous MUC1 peptide-stimulated CD4+ effector cells following adoptive transfer in patients with ovarian cancer. Using MUC1 peptide and IL-2 for ex vivo CD4+/Th1 effector cell generation, we show that three monthly treatment cycles of peripheral blood T cell restimulation and intraperitoneal re-infusion selectively modulated endogenous T cell-mediated immune responses that correlated with diminished serum CA125 tumor marker levels and enhanced patient survival. One patient remains disease free, another patient survived long-term for nearly 16 months with recurrent disease and two patients expired within 3-5 months following final infusion. Although PBL from all patients showed elevated MUC1 cytolytic activity following therapy, such responses did not correlate with therapeutic efficacy. Long-term survivors showed elevated levels of systemic memory (CD45RO) and naïve (CD45RA) CD3/CD4/CD25+ T cells when compared to that of pre-treatment levels and similarly-treated short-term survivors. Such cells co-expressed different levels of Foxp3 and CTLA-4 that resulted in progressively lower systemic Foxp3/CTLA-4 memory T cell ratios that further correlated with disease-free survival. Lastly, these patients showed elevated levels of MUC1-specific T cells expressing the CCR5 and CCR1 chemokine receptors and the chemokine CCL4 associated with Th1 cell differentiation/memory. We suggest that effective immunotherapy with autologous MUC1-stimulated CD4+ effector cells induce differential levels of systemic “Ag-experienced” and “Ag-inexperienced” CD4/CD25+ TReg cell subpopulations that influence long-term tumor immunity in ovarian cancer patients.

