Current Status of the Immunomodulation and Immunomediated Therapeutic Strategies for Multiple Sclerosis

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disease of the central nervous system, and CD4+ T cells form the core immunopathogenic cascade leading to chronic inflammation. Traditionally, Th1 cells (interferon-γ-producing CD4+ T cells) driven by interleukin 12 (IL12) were considered to be the encephalitogenic T cells in MS and experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), an animal model of MS. Currently, Th17 cells (Il17-producing CD4+ T cells) are considered to play a fundamental role in the immunopathogenesis of EAE. This paper highlights the growing evidence that Th17 cells play the core role in the complex adaptive immunity of EAE/MS and discusses the roles of the associated immune cells and cytokines. These constitute the modern immunological basis for the development of novel clinical and preclinical immunomodulatory therapies for MS discussed in this paper.



1. Multiple Sclerosis and Experimental Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) was initially identified in 1868 by Charcot. This disease often begins in young adulthood with intermittent episodes of neurological dysfunction, including visual impairment, ataxia, motor and sensory deficits, and bowel and bladder incontinence. These are attributable to recurrent inflammatory attacks on the white matter of the brain and spinal cord, which lead to the accumulation of perivascularly distributed inflammatory cells within the brain and spinal cord white matter [1].
Beeton et al. first established an animal model of MS in the 1930s, when they immunized monkeys with a central nervous system (CNS) homogenate to induce what is now known as experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) [2]. Since this pilot animal study, EAE has become the most accepted animal model of MS. In recent decades, pathogenic hypotheses have been investigated and novel therapeutic agents tested in this model in the fields of CNS inflammation and demyelination. Therefore, EAE provides a valuable tool for the investigation of the T-cell-dependent pathogenesis of autoimmune inflammation in the CNS and the orchestration of the autoimmune demyelinating inflammation in the CNS of MS patients. Mice and/or genetically modified mice have also been of fundamental value in the exploration of the complex pathogenesis of MS [3, 4]. EAE is undoubtedly the best animal model in which to study autoimmune diseases and particularly the demyelinating diseases of the CNS, such as MS [5].

2. Basic Immunopathogenic Mechanism and the Role of T Cells in EAE and MS
Myelin basic protein-(MBP)-specific T cells isolated from the peripheral lymphocytes of human individuals with MS and encephalitogenic T cells recovered from circulating autoreactive T cells of either immunized or naïve animals have shown that autoreactive T-cell lines that recognize the encephalitogenic part of MBP in vitro can be distinguished from an unprimed rat T-cell population. This confirms that autoreactive T cells play a central role in the pathology of MS [6–8]. EAE can also be induced by adoptively transferring an expanded population of myelin-reactive encephalitogenic CD4+ (T helper [Th]) cells, which allows the further dissection of the immunopathogenic potency of different encephalitogenic CD4+ cell populations [9].
In the 1990s, Mosmann and Coffman postulated that Th cells can be classified into two distinct subsets, Th1 and Th2. Th1 cells produce large quantities of interferon γ (IFNγ), driven by interleukin 12 (IL12), which promotes cellular immunity directed against intracellular pathogens. Alternatively, Th2 cells, which secrete IL4, IL5, IL13, and IL25, are essential in the destruction of extracellular parasites and the mediation of humoral immunity [10, 11]. Self-reactive Th1 clones derived in vitro are capable of adoptively transferring EAE to naïve recipients [12]. Increased levels of Th1 cytokines are particularly evident during EAE/MS relapse, whereas increased Th2 cytokines are found during remission in MS patients when compared with control levels [13]. Clinical and hematological symptoms are exacerbated in relapsing/remitting MS patients following the administration of IFNγ, and this is also observed in other Th1-type diseases, whereas it is less apparent in Th2 diseases [14, 15]. Th1 cells were earlier thought to be pathogenic T cells, whereas Th2 cells were thought to confer an anti-inflammatory potential, constituting protective T cells in both MS and EAE [16–19].
However, this clear-cut immunodysregulation of the Th1/Th2 balance in EAE and MS may be part of a hidden complex of interactions underlying EAE and MS [20]. The Th1-driven nature of the EAE/MS disease was challenged by the finding that IFNγ- and IFNγ-receptor-deficient mice, as well as mice that lack other molecules involved in Th1 differentiation, such as IL12p35, IL12 receptor β2 (IL12Rβ2), and IL18, were not protected from EAE, but instead were more susceptible to the disease [21–25]. Unexpectedly, mice deficient in IL12α (IL12p35), a component of the Th1 paradigm, are vulnerable to EAE. Similarly, IL12Rβ2-deficient mice develop more severe clinical manifestations of EAE, whereas IL12p40-deficient mice are resistant to EAE [23, 24, 26]. These discrepancies and conflicting data indicate that an imbalance in the Th1/Th2 milieu cannot explain the overall immunopathogenic mechanisms underlying EAE and MS.

p19, a novel cytokine heavy-chain homologue of the IL6 subfamily, was discovered as a computational sequence [27]. When the p19 chain is linked to the p40 chain, a subunit of IL12 (another subunit of the IL12 heterodimers is the p35 chain), it forms a novel cytokine designated IL23. Therefore, the deletion of IL12p40 will affect the functions of both IL12 and IL23. Cua and colleagues verified that Il23 but not Il12 is essential for the induction of EAE by generating Il23p19 knockout (KO) mice and comparing them with IL12p35 KO mice [28]. Furthermore, an IL17-producing T-cell subset, driven and expanded by IL23, can pathogenically induce EAE when adoptively transferred into naïve wild-type mice [29, 30]. These IL17-producing T cells were dramatically reduced in the CNS of IL23p19-deficient mice. Based on these studies, researchers confidently suggested that IL17-producing CD4+ T cells are a distinct and novel Th subset that exacerbates autoimmunity, and designated them Th17 cells [31, 32]. Th17 cells are a Th-cell subset distinct from Th1 and Th2 cells in terms of their differentiation, expansion, and effector functions [33, 34]. The discovery of Th17 cells further clarifies the cytokine profile of MS [35]. Recently, the levels of IL17 produced by MBP-stimulated peripheral blood cells obtained from MS patients or controls were shown to correlate with the active lesions in MS patients observed with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [36].
Like other Th subsets, the Th17 lineage is activated by a specific cytokine milieu. However, IL23 cannot produce Th 17 cells de novo from naïve T cells, and the IL23 receptor (IL23R) is not expressed on naïve T cells [37]. Transforming growth factor β (TGFβ) upregulates IL23R expression, thereby conferring responsiveness to IL23, which confirms that TGFβ is a critical cytokine in the commitment to Th17 expansion in vitro and in vivo [38]. In mice, TGFβ together with IL6 can activate antigen-responsive naïve CD4+ T cells to develop into Th17 cells [39]. In humans, naïve CD4+ cells exposed to IL6, TGFβ, and IL21 can develop into Th17 cells, and the production of IL23 plays a role in maintaining these Th17 cells [40, 41]. Altogether, Th17 cells require IL23, TGFβ, IL6, and IL1 for their generation. Th17 cells produce IL17A and IL17F, which are upregulated in chronic lesions [42], and IL22, which is also involved in the pathogenesis of MS. Thus, Th17 cells are a recently discovered, unique Th lineage that produces a repertoire of signature cytokines, including IL17A, IL17F, IL21, and IL22, that are essential for the development of autoimmune diseases such as MS [43].
The discovery of transcription factors that are key regulators of the cytokine expression required to launch lineage-specific transcriptional programs has greatly extended our understanding of Th-cell lineage commitment [44]. It has been shown that T-bet and STAT4 program the commitment of the Th1 lineage and Th1 cytokine production [45], whereas GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) and STAT6 drive Th2 population expansion and Th2 cytokine production [46, 47]. The T-bet and STAT4 (necessary for Th1 differentiation) transcription factors are important in the differentiation of autoimmune T cells in the EAE model [48], and T-bet- and STAT4-deficient mice are resistant to EAE. However, these transcription factors do not mediate the induction of Th17 cells. Instead, in a unique inductive milieu, Th17 differentiation is driven by distinct transcription factors: retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor-γt (Rorγt) and Rorα [33, 34]. Stat3 deletion in T cells also prevents autoimmune uveitis and EAE and increases the expression of IL10 and forkhead box P3 (FoxP3) [49], and the expression of FoxP3 programs the development and functions of Treg cells [50]. In humans, IL23 and IL1β also induce the development of Th17 cells expressing IL17A, IL17F, IL22, IL26, IFNγ, the chemokine CCL20, and the transcription factor RORγ [51–53], as illustrated in Figure 1 (adapted from Hirota et al. [54]).
 Recent microarray studies of lesions in MS patients demonstrated an increased expression of IL17, confirming that Th17 cells play an important role in the development of inflammation and demyelination and in the eventual damage of the CNS. IL17 is a recently described cytokine produced in humans almost exclusively by activated memory T cells and can induce the production of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines from parenchymal cells and macrophages. Patients with MS ha