The Retinoic Acid-Metabolizing Enzyme Cyp26b1 Regulates CD4 T Cell Differentiation and Function.

The vitamin A metabolite retinoic acid (RA) has potent immunomodulatory properties that affect T cell differentiation, migration and function. However, the precise role of RA metabolism in T cells remains unclear. Catabolism of RA is mediated by the Cyp26 family of cytochrome P450 oxidases. We examined the role of Cyp26b1, the T cell-specific family member, in CD4+ T cells. Mice with a conditional knockout of Cyp26b1 in T cells (Cyp26b1
−/− mice) displayed normal lymphoid development but showed an increased sensitivity to serum retinoids, which led to increased differentiation under both inducible regulatory T (iTreg) cell- and TH17 cell-polarizing conditions in vitro. Further, Cyp26b1 expression was differentially regulated in iTreg and TH17 cells. Transfer of naïve Cyp26b1
−/− CD4+ T cells into Rag1
−/− mice resulted in significantly reduced disease in a model of T cell-dependent colitis. Our results show that T cell-specific expression of Cyp26b1 is required for the development of T cell-mediated colitis and may be applicable to the development of therapeutics that target Cyp26b1 for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.



Retinoic acid (RA) is a vitamin A metabolite that plays a critical role during embryonic development [1] and has important immunomodulatory functions in adults [2]. For example, vitamin A deficiency can lead to profound immunological impairments in children such as an increased susceptibility to infections [3]. RA binds nuclear RA receptors (RARs) and retinoid X receptors which transcriptionally regulate genes that contain specific RA response elements [4]. Synthesis of RA from vitamin A is a tightly controlled process that enables specialized cells such as dendritic cells (DCs) to modulate the activation, gut homing ability and function of CD4+ T cells [5]. Additionally, RA has been shown to strongly promote the differentiation of inducible regulatory T cells (iTreg cells) in the presence of TGF-β [6] and can modulate the migration and function of T helper 17 (TH17) cells in the intestine [7]. Interestingly, it has recently been shown that RA signaling occurs in T cells during the early stages of inflammation [8], suggesting that RA may be required for optimal effector T cell responses. Indeed, optimal TH1 effector T cell responses during Toxoplasma gondii infection require RA signaling [9]. Thus, RA signaling is critical for both effector and regulatory T cell function.
Despite the importance of RA signaling in T cells, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms that control RA bioavailability, signaling and metabolism in T cells and how these processes ultimately affect T cell differentiation and function. The cytochrome P450 family 26, subfamily b, polypeptide 1 (Cyp26b1) enzyme has been recently identified as the primary negative regulator of RA responsiveness in T cells [10]. Cyp26b1 is highly induced in the presence of RA and is downregulated by the cytokine TGF-β1 [10]. Cyp26b1 was also shown to modulate the RA-dependent expression of the gut-homing receptor CCR9 on T cells [10]. Thus, regulation of RA signaling by Cyp26b1 likely plays a central role in T cell function. However, the specific role of Cyp26b1 in T cells has not been investigated in vivo.
RA has been shown to play an important role in mucosal immune responses and oral tolerance. Intestinal cell populations including DCs and epithelial cells are significant sources of RA [2] and vitamin A deficiency has a dramatic effect on intestinal immunity and physiology [11]. Further, administration of RA can protect mice from chemically-induced colitis and the ratio of Foxp3 to IL-17 expression increased in colon biopsies treated with RA from ulcerative colitis patients [12]. The aim of the present study was to assess the role of Cyp26b1 in regulating RA-dependent T cell immune responses in the intestine. We show that although T cell-intrinsic expression of Cyp26b1 is dispensable for T cell development, Cyp26b1-deficient T cells display enhanced iTreg and TH17 cell differentiation in vitro. Further, following adoptive transfer into immunodeficient hosts, Cyp26b1-deficient T cells induced significantly less intestinal inflammation. Together, our results identify a critical role for Cyp26b1-dependent catabolism of RA in T cell differentiation and function.

Mice with a germline deletion of Cyp26b1 display severe bone and limb abnormalities and die in utero
[14]. In order to assess the role of Cyp26b1 in adult T cells, we generated mice with a T cell-specific deletion of Cyp26b1 by breeding Cyp26b1
fl/fl mice with mice expressing the Cre recombinase under the control of the Cd4 promoter/enhancer (here termed Cyp26b1
−/− mice developed normally into adult-hood, displayed no gross defects and were born with expected Mendelian ratios compared to Cyp26b1
fl/fl littermates. We failed to observe any differences in the fre