Interferon-α-Conditioned Human Monocytes Combine a Th1-Orienting Attitude with the Induction of Autologous Th17 Responses: Role of IL-23 and IL-12

IFN-α exerts multiple effects leading to immune protection against pathogens and cancer as well to autoimmune reactions by acting on monocytes and dendritic cells. We analyzed the versatility of human monocytes conditioned by IFN-α towards dendritic cell differentiation (IFN-DC) in shaping the autologous T-helper response. Priming of naïve CD4 T cells with autologous IFN-DC in the presence of either SEA or anti-CD3, resulted, in addition to a prominent expansion of CXCR3+ IFN-γ-producing CD4 Th1 cells, in the emergence of two distinct subsets of IL-17-producing CD4 T cells: i) a predominant Th17 population selectively producing IL-17 and expressing CCR6; ii) a minor Th1/Th17 population, producing both IL-17 and IFN-γ. After phagocytosis of apoptotic cells, IFN-DC induced Th17 cell expansion and IL-17 release. Notably, the use of neutralizing antibodies revealed that IL-23 was an essential cytokine in mediating Th17 cell development by IFN-DC. The demonstration of the IFN-DC-induced expansion of both Th1 and Th17 cell populations reveals the intrinsic plasticity of these DC in orienting the immune response and provides a mechanistic link between IFN-α and the onset of autoimmune phenomena, which have been correlated with both IL-17 production and exposure to IFN-α.



IFN-α has been recently recognized as an important factor in linking innate and adaptive immunity. In fact, through its rapid secretion by specialized cells, such as plasmacytoid DC (pDC), and concomitant capability to act on cells of innate and acquired immunity [1], [2], IFN-α promotes the induction of immune responses, including auto-reactive responses. In fact, IFN-α has been considered as the driving factor in several human autoimmune diseases such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) [3], myositis, Sjogren's syndrome and the initial phase of psoriasis [1].
IFN-α can contribute to the breaking of tolerance and to the induction/expansion of auto-reactive T and B cells through direct effects on these cells or by modulating immune functions through the induction of DC costimulatory molecules and soluble factors [1], [4]. Interestingly, the association between an increased production and or bioavailability of IFN-α and alterations in DC homeostasis has been indicated in various human inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Of note, the Toll Like Receptor (TLR)-dependent production of IFN-α by pDC may play a central role in the pathogenesis of SLE [1], [3] and psoriasis [5] by inducing the differentiation of monocytes into highly activated myeloid DC.
The pathogenetic role of IFN-α in autoimmune disorders has been traditionally attributed to its ability to polarize T-helper cells toward the Th1 type of immune response and to induce the generation/activation of effector immune cells [6]. However, the discovery of IL-23 and IL-17 and the recognition of the new IL-23/Th17 axis in the pathogenesis of a variety of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases [7], [8] have led to reconsider the role played by cytokines other than IL-12, such as IFN-γ, TGF-β, IL-6, IL-1β, that are mainly produced by activated accessory cells and APC, particularly DC. In this regard, however, the possible role of IFN-α and DC in the induction of a Th17 CD4+ T cell response has not yet been investigated.
We as well as others [2, and references therein] have demonstrated that IFN-α induces the rapid differentiation of monocytes into highly active DC (IFN-DC), capable of promoting Th1 type immune responses through the expansion of CD4 and CD8 T cells producing large quantities of IFN-γ [9], [10]. Further studies suggested that cytokines belonging to the IL-12 cytokine family (IL-23 and IL-27), could play a role in the Th1-promoting activity of IFN-DC [10].
In this study, we have investigated the interaction between IFN-DC and autologous naïve CD4 T cells. The characterization of the cytokine milieu produced by IFN-DC revealed the release of soluble factors known to promote Th17 differentiation. Consistently, IFN-DC induced a clear-cut Th17 response and IL-17 production. Since Th17 lymphocytes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of autoimmune disorders, these findings are instrumental in understanding how IFN-α, by shaping DC functions including IL-23 release, can induce autoimmunity, thus leading to a more comprehensive vision of the role of this cytokine in the regulation of the immune response under both physiological and pathological conditions.

IFN-α-conditioned DC and induction of a Th1 type response in the presence of SEA
In this study, two experimental systems were used in which human naïve CD4 T cells purified from peripheral blood were co-cultured with autologous IFN-DC or IL-4-DC and stimulated or not with either the superantigen SEA Vbeta specific [11], which activates a wide repertoire of T-cell receptors beta variable chains (TCRV beta) with subsequent massive proliferation of CD4 T cells, or anti-CD3-coated beads.
We preliminary evaluated the ensemble of cytokines accumulating in the supernatant from DC cultures. The analysis of IFN-DC cytokine milieu showed the presence, in addition to IL-12 and IL-23 as previously reported [10], of high levels of TNF-α and IL-6, together with lower levels of IL-1β (Fig. 1A). Significantly lower or virtually undetectable levels of these cytokines were secreted by IL-4-DC (Fig. 1A).

Cytokine production by IFN-DC and IL-4-DC and induction of a Th1 type response in naïve CD4 T cells stimulated with SEA in the presence of autologous DC.

A) Cytokine production by IFN-DC and IL-4-DC. The amounts of the indicated cytokines were determined by ELISA in the DC culture supernatants, as described in Materials and Methods, after three days (IFN-DC) or five days of differentiation (IL-4-DC). The values represent the mean +/− SD of five independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed by Mann-Whitney test. * p<0.05. B) Cytokine production in the supernatants of cultures of CD4 T cells stimulated with SEA in the presence of autologous IFN-DC or IL-4-DC. After six days of co-cultures, the cytokine production was analyzed by ELISA as described in Materials and Methods. The values represent the mean +/− SD of five independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed by Mann-Whitney test. * p<0.05. C) Representative dot plot analysis of intracellular staining for IFN-γ and IL-4 in CD4 T cells primed with SEA in the presence of autologous DC. Naïve CD4 T cells were stimulated with SEA in the presence of autologous DC. At day 6 of co-culture, IFN-γ or IL-4 production at single cell level was analyzed, after activation with PMA/ionomycin in the presence of brefeldin-A as described in Materials and Methods, by intracellular cytokine staining. The analysis was performed on electronically gated CD4+ T cells. D) FACS analysis of the co-expression of CD212 and CD25 or CXCR3 and CD25 on CD4 T cells co-cultured with autologous DC for six days in the absence or presence of SEA. Each bar represents the percentage of double-positive CD4 T cells. Panels C and D show the results of one representative experiment out of three.

We then determined the profile and amount of cytokines released in the supernatant of co-cultures stimulated or not with SEA. As shown in Fig. 1B, in the absence of SEA the naïve CD4 T cells secreted significantly higher levels of IFN-γ when co-cultured with autologous IFN-DC as compared toIL-4-DC. Stimulation with SEA resulted in a substantial increase in the production of IFN-γ in the co-cultures of naïve CD4 T cells with either IFN-DC or IL-4-DC. However, stimulation in the presence of IFN-DC induced the release of much greater amounts of this cytokine. Considerable amounts of IL-13 were released by the naïve CD4 T cells co-cultured with IL-4-DC, whereas very low levels of this cytokine were secreted by the naïve CD4 T cells co-cultured with IFN-DC in the presence of the superantigen. Notably, significantly higher levels of IL-23 were secreted by IFN-DC as compared to IL-4-DC upon co-cultivation with autologous naïve CD4 T cells Intracellular IFN-γ and IL-4 staining performed on the expanded CD4 T cell population after restimulation with PMA/ionomycin, confirmed the explicit attitude of IFN-DC to strongly favor the development of IFN-γ-producing T cells (Fig. 1C). Likewise, the analysis of the co-expression of the surface markers CXCR3 or CD212 (IL-12Rβ1chain) with the activation marker CD25 confirmed that IFN-DC efficiently expanded bona fide Th1 cells (Fig. 1D).
Of note, IFN-DC were superior with respect to IL-4-DC in inducing the expression of CD154 (CD40L), a marker of activated CD4 T cells. At both intermediate and high SEA concentrations, a higher percentage of CD154+ T cells was detected when the naïve CD4 T cells were co-cultured with autologous IFN-DC as compared to IL-4-DC (Fig. 2A), and CD154 membrane expression was far more intense in the co-cultures with IFN-DC as compared to those with IL-4-DC, in the presence of either SEA or anti-CD3 (Fig. 2B). Replacement of SEA with anti-CD3 coated beads for naïve CD4 T cell activation resulted in a further increase in CD154 expression exclusively on CD4 T cells co-cultured with IL-4-DC, suggesting that IFN-DC provide per se an optimal co-stimulation for efficient priming of CD4 T cells and maximal CD154 expression (Fig. 2B).

IFN-DC are superior with respect to IL-4-DC in inducing the expression of CD154 (CD40L).

A) CD154 expression by naïve CD4 T cells following isolation (CTR) and after activation with different concentrations of SEA (1, 10, or 20 µg/ml) in the presence of autologous DC (1∶4 ratio) for 6 days. Each bar represents the mean percentage +/− SD of CD4 T cells expressing CD154, as derived from three independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed by Mann-Whitney test. * p<0.05. B) Representative 