γδ T Cells Acquire Effector Fates in the Thymus and Differentiate into Cytokine-Producing Effectors in a Listeria Model of Infection Independently of CD28 Costimulation.

Both antigen recognition and CD28 costimulation are required for the activation of naïve αβ T cells and their subsequent differentiation into cytokine-producing or cytotoxic effectors. Notably, this two-signal paradigm holds true for all αβ T cell subsets, regardless of whether they acquire their effector function in the periphery or the thymus. Because of contradictory results, however, it remains unresolved as to whether CD28 costimulation is necessary for γδ T cell activation and differentiation. Given that γδ T cells have been recently shown to acquire their effector fates in the thymus, it is conceivable that the contradictory results may be explained, in part, by a differential requirement for CD28 costimulation in the development or differentiation of each γδ T cell effector subset. To test this, we examined the role of CD28 in γδ T cell effector fate determination and function. We report that, although IFNγ-producing γδ T (γδ-IFNγ) cells express higher levels of CD28 than IL-17-producing γδ T (γδ-17) cells, CD28-deficiency had no effect on the thymic development of either subset. Also, following Listeria infection, we found that the expansion and differentiation of γδ-17 and γδ-IFNγ effectors were comparable between CD28+/+ and CD28−/− mice. To understand why CD28 costimulation is dispensable for γδ T cell activation and differentiation, we assessed glucose uptake and utilization by γδ T cells, as CD28 costimulation is known to promote glycolysis in αβ T cells. Importantly, we found that γδ T cells express higher surface levels of glucose transporters than αβ T cells and, when activated, exhibit effector functions over a broader range of glucose concentrations than activated αβ T cells. Together, these data not only demonstrate an enhanced glucose metabolism in γδ T cells but also provide an explanation for why γδ T cells are less dependent on CD28 costimulation than αβ T cells.



The current paradigm for the activation of naïve αβ T cells and their subsequent differentiation into cytokine-producing or cytotoxic effectors is that two signals are required: one through the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) and the other through the co-stimulatory molecule, CD28. These two signals act together not only to prevent anergy [1]–[3], but also to promote cell survival [4], to activate the switch to glycolysis [5], [6], to stabilize cytokine gene transcripts [7], [8], and to regulate alternative splicing [9].
While most αβ T cells differentiate into effectors in the periphery, some αβ T cells subsets, such as Natural Killer T (NKT) cells and regulatory T (Treg) cells, acquire their effector functions in the thymus [10]–[14]. Despite the change in their site of differentiation, NKT and Treg cells require CD28 costimulatory signals during their development in the thymus. Specifically, NKT cells require CD28 costimulation, following their selection, to expand and mature [15], [16], whereas Treg cells require CD28 costimulation to activate the Treg genetic program, which includes the expression of genes encoding Foxp3, GITR and CTLA-4 [17].
Due to conflicting results, it is unclear whether CD28 costimulation is also required for the activation and differentiation of γδ T cells. However, as the vast majority of these studies were conducted at a time when it was not known that γδ T cells have distinct effector fates and that acquisition of these fates occurs in the thymus [18], [19], it is possible that the conflicting results may be explained, in part, by each γδ T cell effector subset having a different requirement for CD28 costimulation, either during their development in the thymus or during their differentiation into effectors in the periphery. For this reason, we decided to re-evaluate the role of CD28 costimulation in the generation of γδ T cell effectors.
Here, we report that CD28 is differentially expressed between IFNγ-producing γδ T (γδ-IFNγ) cells and IL-17-producing γδ T (γδ-17) cells, with γδ-IFNγ expressing 2 to 3–fold more CD28 than γδ-17 cells. Despite this difference in expression, CD28 costimulation was not required to generate thymic and peripheral γδ-IFNγ and γδ-17 cells. Surprisingly, CD28 signaling was required to generate wild-type numbers of γδ thymocytes and γδ T cells. The reduction in the number of γδ lineage cells in CD28−/− mice was not due to defects in either γδ lineage commitment or γδ thymocyte proliferation and survival, but instead was due to impaired proliferation of thymic progenitors. We also assessed the ability of CD28-deficient γδ T cells to differentiate into cytokine-producing effectors during infection with Listeria monocytogenes (Lm), and observed no difference in γδ T cell expansion and differentiation between infected CD28+/+ and CD28−/− mice. Thus, these data not only indicate that CD28 is dispensable 