Tumor-Infiltrating γδ T Lymphocytes: Pathogenic Role, Clinical Significance, and Differential Programing in the Tumor Microenvironment.

There is increasing clinical evidence indicating that the immune system may either promote or inhibit tumor progression. Several studies have demonstrated that tumors undergoing remission are largely infiltrated by T lymphocytes [tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs)], but on the other hand, several studies have shown that tumors may be infiltrated by TILs endowed with suppressive features, suggesting that TILs are rather associated with tumor progression and unfavorable prognosis. γδ T lymphocytes are an important component of TILs that may contribute to tumor immunosurveillance, as also suggested by promising reports from several small phase-I clinical trials. Typically, γδ T lymphocytes perform effector functions involved in anti-tumor immune responses (cytotoxicity, production of IFN-γ and TNF-α, and dendritic cell maturation), but under appropriate conditions they may divert from the typical Th1-like phenotype and polarize to Th2, Th17, and Treg cells thus acquiring the capability to inhibit anti-tumor immune responses and promote tumor growth. Recent studies have shown a high frequency of γδ T lymphocytes infiltrating different types of cancer, but the nature of this association and the exact mechanisms underlying it remain uncertain and whether or not the presence of tumor-infiltrating γδ T lymphocytes is a definite prognostic factor remains controversial. In this paper, we will review studies of tumor-infiltrating γδ T lymphocytes from patients with different types of cancer, and we will discuss their clinical relevance. Moreover, we will also discuss on the complex interplay between cancer, tumor stroma, and γδ T lymphocytes as a major determinant of the final outcome of the γδ T lymphocyte response. Finally, we propose that targeting γδ T lymphocyte polarization and skewing their phenotype to adapt to the microenvironment might hold great promise for the treatment of cancer.



T cells carrying the γδ T cell receptor (TCR) are important effector cells that may play a role in the anti-tumor immune response. γδ Cells are not a homogeneous population of cells with a single physiological role. Instead, ever increasing complexity in both phenotype and function is being ascribed to γδ cell subsets from various tissues and locations, both in mice and humans.
γδ T cells account for 1–5% of CD3+ T cells in the peripheral blood, but constitute a major subset in other anatomic sites, such as the intestine or the skin [here, however, only in the murine but not in human skin (1)]. In the blood of most healthy individuals, T cells expressing the Vδ2 gene paired with one particular Vγ9 chain (referred to as Vγ9Vδ2 T cells) account for 50 to >90% of the γδ T cell population. In contrast, intestinal intraepithelial γδ T cells frequently express the Vδ1 gene, which can associate with different Vγ elements (1, 2). Vδ1 γδ T cells recognize the MHC class I-related molecules MICA, MICB, and ULBPs, which are expressed on epithelial cells by heat shock or oxidative stress and are constitutively expressed to variable levels on many epithelial and hematopoietic tumor cells (3, 4). It has been debated whether MICA/MICB and ULBPs are directly recognized by the Vδ1 TCR or, indirectly activate Vδ1 T cells upon binding to the stimulatory natural killer (NK) receptor, NKG2D, which is also expressed by the vast majority of γδ T cells.
Vγ9Vδ2 T cells recognize phosphoantigens (PAgs) without requirement for antigen processing and presentation, and MHC restriction. PAgs are pyrophosphates derived from the microbial non-mevalonate isoprenoid biosynthesis pathway (5, 6). Structurally related pyrophosphates are generated in eukaryotic cells through the mevalonate pathway. Micromolar concentrations of endogenous pyrophosphates are required for Vγ9Vδ2 T cell activation and such concentrations are achieved after cellular stress and transformation (7). Given the cross-reactivity between microbial and self PAgs, there is a great interest in elucidating how TCR signaling can be induced by such small molecules. PAgs can directly activate Vγ9Vδ2 T cells, but such activation is greatly enhanced by monocytes and/or dendritic cells (DCs). Hence, either PAgs are presented as cargo to the reactive γδ TCR or their cellular processing somehow sensitizes cell recognition through the engagement of the Vγ9Vδ2 TCR by stabilizing surface expression of a TCR-binding molecules (8). A candidate molecule involved in intracellular PAg processing is the F1-ATPase, which directly binds the Vγ9Vδ2 TCR and interacts with ApppI, an adenosine derivative of IPP (9). Moreover, it has been recently found that PAg-induced Vγ9Vδ2 T cell activation requires butyrophilin 3A1 (BTN3A1) (10–12). Therefore, production of exogenous PAgs or up-regulation of endogenous PAgs in human cells in response to either infections or tumor transformation 