The Timing of Stimulation and IL-2 Signaling Regulate Secondary CD8 T Cell Responses.

Abstract
Memory CD8 T cells provide protection to immune hosts by eliminating pathogen-infected cells during re-infection. While parameters influencing the generation of primary (1°) CD8 T cells are well established, the factors controlling the development of secondary (2°) CD8 T cell responses remain largely unknown. Here, we address the mechanisms involved in the generation and development of 2° memory (M) CD8 T cells. We observed that the time at which 1° M CD8 T cells enter into immune response impacts their fate and differentiation into 2° M CD8 T cells. Late-entry of 1° M CD8 T cells into an immune response (relative to the onset of infection) not only facilitated the expression of transcription factors associated with memory formation in 2° effector CD8 T cells, but also influenced the ability of 2° M CD8 T cells to localize within the lymph nodes, produce IL-2, and undergo Ag-driven proliferation. The timing of stimulation of 1° M CD8 T cells also impacted the duration of expression of the high-affinity IL-2 receptor (CD25) on 2° effector CD8 T cells and their sensitivity to IL-2 signaling. Importantly, by blocking or enhancing IL-2 signaling in developing 2° CD8 T cells, we provide direct evidence for the role of IL-2 in controlling the differentiation of Ag-driven 2° CD8 T cell responses. Thus, our data suggest that the process of 1° M to 2° M CD8 T cell differentiation is not fixed and can be manipulated, a notion with relevance for the design of future prime-boost vaccination approaches.



Memory CD8 T cells are an important component of the adaptive immune response because of their ability to establish long-lasting protective immunity against recurrent infections [1–6]. Memory CD8 T cells are derived from naïve Ag-specific CD8 T cells that responded to pathogen-derived Ags, underwent robust proliferative expansion, and survived the contraction phase [7,8]. The protection afforded by memory CD8 T cells is due to persistence at higher numbers, unique trafficking abilities and localization in peripheral tissues, and rapid initiation of effector functions after Ag re-encounter [1,9,10]. These characteristics of primary memory (1° M) CD8 T cells distinguish them from the naïve CD8 T cells they are derived from.
Research devoted to understanding the development of memory CD8 T cells suggests that the generation of 1° M CD8 T cells is influenced by a number of factors [2,11–13]. For instance, studies have shown that the number of 1° M CD8 T cells generated correlates with the number of accumulated 1° effector CD8 T cells at the peak of expansion [14,15]. Therefore, parameters influencing 1° effector CD8 T cell expansion and/or survival (e.g. Ag presentation, co-stimulation, and signal 3 cytokines) impact the generation of 1° M CD8 T cells [2,10–12]. Interestingly, these factors have also been shown to influence the rate of 1° M CD8 T cell differentiation [10,11,16]. As an example, naïve CD8 T cells activated in a low-inflammatory environment (e.g. peptide-coated DC vaccination) undergo reduced levels of proliferative expansion but acquire long-term memory characteristics at an accelerated rate [17–19]. Additionally, the modulation of functional Ag presentation (e.g. antibiotic treatment to stop bacterial infection) also impacts the transition of Ag-specific CD8 T cells from effector to memory cells [16,20,21]. Furthermore, naive CD8 T cells activated in the presence of pre-existing memory CD8 T cells of an unrelated Ag specificity acquire memory characteristics at an accelerated rate [22]. Finally, recruitment of naïve Ag-specific CD8 T cells over time into an immune response influences memory CD8 T cell differentiation based on when cognate Ag is encountered [23,24]. This suggests that the process of naïve to 1° M CD8 T cell differentiation is not fixed and that the progression to memory can be manipulated.
Studies have shown that the generation of large numbers of memory CD8 T cells enhances CD8 T cell-mediated protection to re-infection. An effective strategy to increase the absolute numbers of memory CD8 T cells is through prime-boost vaccinations that elicit 2° immune responses [25,26]. Recent studies from our lab have shown that repeated stimulations of Ag-specific CD8 T cells results in differential regulation of a large number of genes in subsequent populations of memory CD8 T cells [27]. Interestingly, similar to 1° M CD8 T cell responses, 2° M CD8 T cell numbers and phenotype are modulated by the type and duration of infection and levels of inflammation [28,29]. However, it has also been previously documented that 2° M CD8 T cells are slower to acquire a long-term memory phenotype compared to 1° M CD8 T cells [30].
Since the timing of stimulation of naïve CD8 T cells has been shown to influence 1° M CD8 T cell differentiation, we devised a model in which 1° M CD8 T cells are recruited at different times i