Distinct and complementary roles for Aspergillus fumigatus-specific Tr1 and Foxp3+ regulatory T cells in humans and mice.

Unlike induced Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Foxp3+ iTreg) that have been shown to play an essential role in the development of protective immunity to the ubiquitous mold Aspergillus fumigatus, type-(1)-regulatory T cells (Tr1) cells have, thus far, not been implicated in this process. Here, we evaluated the role of Tr1 cells specific for an epitope derived from the cell wall glucanase Crf-1 of A. fumigatus (Crf-1/p41) in antifungal immunity. We identified Crf-1/p41-specific latent-associated peptide+ Tr1 cells in healthy humans and mice after vaccination with Crf-1/p41+zymosan. These cells produced high amounts of interleukin (IL)-10 and suppressed the expansion of antigen-specific T cells in vitro and in vivo. In mice, in vivo differentiation of Tr1 cells was dependent on the presence of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, c-Maf and IL-27. Moreover, in comparison to Tr1 cells, Foxp3+ iTreg that recognize the same epitope were induced in an interferon gamma-type inflammatory environment and more potently suppressed innate immune cell activities. Overall, our data show that Tr1 cells are involved in the maintenance of antifungal immune homeostasis, and most likely play a distinct, yet complementary, role compared with Foxp3+ iTreg.


Regulatory T (Treg) cells have a key role for the maintenance of immune homeostasis, prevention of autoimmunity and protection against infections.1 Besides thymus-derived naturally occurring Foxp3+ nTreg, two major subsets of induced Treg cells have been identified: Foxp3+ regulatory T cells (Foxp3+ iTreg) and Foxp3− type-(1)-regulatory T (Tr1) cells that differ in their mode of induction, phenotype and cytokine expression but share the overall feature to suppress immune responses.2 Foxp3+ iTreg differentiate in the presence of sub-immunogenic doses of antigen and transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) in vitro and in vivo,3, 4 produce high amounts of interleukin (IL)-10 and TGF-β, and protect from chronic immunopathology in response to pathogens such as Leishmania major, hepatitis C virus or HIV.5, 6, 7 Tr1 cells, on the other hand, are induced through the coordinate activation of the transcription factor c-Maf by IL-27 and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr).8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 Tr1 cells express latent-associated peptide (LAP) that binds TGF-β, produce high amounts of IL-10 relative to interferon gamma (IFN-γ) but no IL-410, 14, 15 and are presumed to protect from T-helper type-1(Th1)/Th17-mediated autoimmune disease in mice16 and prevent reactions to common allergens including house dust mites17, 18 and bee venom19 in humans.
Aspergillus fumigatus is an ubiquitous mold that can cause distinct modes of pathology: invasive aspergillosis (IA) and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) in clinical situations such as neutropenia, immune suppression and chronic obstructive lung disease. In these cases, impaired lung immunity and subsequent fungal infections are accompanied with insufficient Th1 (IA)20, 21 and overwhelming Th2 (ABPA) responses, respectively.22, 23 Foxp3+ nTreg as well as Foxp3+ iTreg have been demonstrated to be essential for the induction of protective tolerance to the fungus in mice24 and humans25 by inhibition of overwhelming effector Th1/Th2 cell responses at late stages of experimental IA24, 26 and in ABPA patients.25
A clinical challenge is the induction of balanced antifungal effector T-cell responses together with Treg-cell responses to reduce the risk for Th1/Th2-mediated immunopathology and to promote the development of a durable protective immunity to A. fumigatus.23 This could be accomplished by an adoptive transfer of antifungal T cells. A. fumigatus-specific recombinant proteins derived from cell wall components are proposed to be the most promising immunogenic targets to induce protective antifungal immunity.27 We27 and others28, 29 have previously shown that epitopes derived from the cell wall glucanase Crf-1 induce protective antifungal Th1 responses, and more specifically, we identified an immunodominant epitope within the cell wall glucanase Crf-1 of A. fumigatus (Crf-1/p41, thereafter referred to p41) that induces protective Th1 responses in humans and Th1/Treg in mice.30 In the present study, we identified p41-specific Tr1 cells in the peripheral blood of healthy humans and in mice after vaccination with p41 and investigated their potential role in antifungal immunity.

Identification of pre-existing p41+ Tr1 clones in healthy human donors
We have recently shown that the p41-peptide induces protective A. fumigatus-specific Th1 cell responses in humans and Th1/iTreg in a mouse model of aspergillosis.27, 30 This observation let us to investigate whether p41 has the potential to induce antifungal Tr1 cells, another Treg-cell subset that can be induced by inhaled antigens and regulates immune responses to these antigens. Due to 