mTOR Inhibition Attenuates Dextran Sulfate Sodium-Induced Colitis by Suppressing T Cell Proliferation and Balancing TH1/TH17/Treg Profile.

It has been established that mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) inhibitors have anti-inflammatory effects in models of experimental colitis. However, the underlying mechanism is largely unknown. In this research, we investigate the anti-inflammatory effects of AZD8055, a potent mTOR inhibitor, on T cell response in dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice, a commonly used animal model of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). Severity of colitis is evaluated by changing of body weight, bloody stool, fecal consistency, histology evaluation and cytokine expression. We find that AZD8055 treatment attenuates DSS-induced body weight loss, colon length shortening and pathological damage of the colon. And AZD8055 treatment decreases colonic expression of genes encoding the pro-inflammatory cytokines interferon-γ, interleukin (IL)-17A, IL-1β,IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor(TNF)-a and increases colonic expression of anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10. We show that AZD8055 treatment decreases the percentages of CD4+ T cells and CD8+ T cells in spleen, lymph nodes and peripheral blood of mice. We also find that AZD8055 treatment significantly reduces the number of T helper 1(TH1) cells and TH17 cells and increases regulatory T (Treg) cells in the lamina propria and mesenteric lymph nodes. Furthermore, we demonstrates that AZD8055 suppresses the proliferation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and the differentiation of TH1/TH17 cells and expands Treg cells in vitro. The results suggest that, in experimental colitis, AZD8055 exerts anti-inflammatory effect by regulating T helper cell polarization and proliferation.



Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) which consist of Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC), are chronic heterogeneous intestinal disorders, which remain clinically challenging [1, 2]. Currently, the drugs for IBD patients are limited. The precise etiology of IBD remains unknown, although it is generally accepted that it result from an overactive immune response to commensal bacteria within the gut in genetically predisposed individuals [3].
Helper T cells have a significant role in IBD pathogenesis [4]. TH1, TH2, TH17 and regulatory T cells (Tregs) form an important quarter of helper T cells [5, 6]. Studies have been shown that TH1, TH2, and TH17 cells were essential for defenses against excessive entry of microorganisms [7, 8]. Intestinal immune homeostasis depends on the regulation and balance of these T cell subgroups. It has been shown that deregulated overexpansion and activation of effector cells in relation to regulatory T cells can lead to intestinal inflammation like IBD [9, 10].
The T cell transfer induced colitis has been used to study T cell response in IBD. In this study, CD4+CD45RBhi T cells are transferred into immune-deficient mice. Since this model depends on genetically compromised mice and an unbalance of naïve and Treg cells which is not seen in wild type mice, it does not reflect the immunological courses of the development of pathogenic T cells in healthy animals [11–13]. On the other hand, DSS-induced colitis model is a classic and stable model of murine colitis, which can be used in all backgrounds of mice. Many drugs used in IBD patients are also available for this model [14–16]. Previous studies have shown that DSS-induced colitis is often not considered as a good model for T cell involvement, since it is chemical damage model which can be induced without the help of T cells. However, recent studies show that T cells especially pro-inflammatory, antigen-specific CD4+ T cells accumulate at the site of inflammation, and do progress during DSS-induced colitis model, suggesting that DSS model can be used to study T cell development during intestinal inflammation [17–19].
Mammalian target of Rapamycin (mTOR) is a protein kinase that regulates cell survival, cell growth, cell proliferation and autophagy. Besides its crucial role in tumorigenesis, recent studies show that mTOR participates in adjusting adaptive immune response and modulating CD4+ or CD8+ T cell polarization, as well as increasing the percentage of Treg cells [20–22]. Farkas et al showed that Rapamycin, an mTOR inhibitor, reduced leukocyte migration as effectively as immunosuppressant cyclosporine A (CsA) in DSS-induced murine colitis [23]. Matsuda et al found that Everolimus, a Rapamycin analog, prevented colitis in interleukin-10(IL-10)–/–model by decreasing the percentage of CD4+ T cells in the colonic mucosa and reducing IFN-γ production [24].
mTOR functions in two multi-protein complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2. mTORC1 is suppressed by Rapamycin, but Rapamycin can’t block mTOR activity completely due to its inability to influence mTORC2 directly [25,26]. On the other hand, ATP-competitive mTOR inhibitor AZD8055 targets the ATP site and inhibits any mTOR-containing complex [27]