Glycolysis and glutaminolysis cooperatively control T cell function by limiting metabolite supply to N-glycosylation.

Rapidly proliferating cells switch from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis plus glutaminolysis, markedly increasing glucose and glutamine catabolism. Although Otto Warburg first described aerobic glycolysis in cancer cells >90 years ago, the primary purpose of this metabolic switch remains controversial. The hexosamine biosynthetic pathway requires glucose and glutamine for de novo synthesis of UDP-GlcNAc, a sugar-nucleotide that inhibits receptor endocytosis and signaling by promoting N-acetylglucosamine branching of Asn (N)-linked glycans. Here, we report that aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis co-operatively reduce UDP-GlcNAc biosynthesis and N-glycan branching in mouse T cell blasts by starving the hexosamine pathway of glucose and glutamine. This drives growth and pro-inflammatory TH17 over anti-inflammatory-induced T regulatory (iTreg) differentiation, the latter by promoting endocytic loss of IL-2 receptor-α (CD25). Thus, a primary function of aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis is to co-operatively limit metabolite supply to N-glycan biosynthesis, an activity with widespread implications for autoimmunity and cancer.
DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.21330.001
.


Under anaerobic conditions oxidative phosphorylation is blocked, forcing cells to generate ATP by converting glucose to lactate via glycolysis. This is a highly inefficient use of glucose, generating only 2 ATP per glucose instead of 36–38 ATP per glucose with complete oxidation. Yet under aerobic conditions, rapidly dividing cells such as T cells paradoxically switch their metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation to aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis, where glucose is fermented to lactate despite the presence of oxygen (Wang et al., 1976; Warburg et al., 1927; Warburg et al., 1924) and primary carbon flux into the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) is switched from glucose to glutamine (DeBerardinis et al., 2007). The function of this metabolic switch has remained obscure since Otto Warburg first reported that cancer cells ferment glucose to lactate despite the presence of oxygen (aerobic glycolysis) over 90 years ago (Warburg et al., 1927; Warburg et al., 1924). Glucose metabolites generated by glycolysis are precursors for nucleotide, amino acid and lipid biosynthetic pathways, leading some to suggest that increased glucose uptake may serve to promote the biomass required for rapid cell division (Lunt and Vander Heiden, 2011; Vander Heiden et al., 2009). However, these biosynthetic pathways account for <10% of the increase in glucose uptake induced by the Warburg effect (DeBerardinis et al., 2007; Hume et al., 1978), implying other critical functions. Alternatively, constraining oxidative phosphorylation in rapidly dividing cells may serve to limit cellular damage from reactive oxygen species (Le et al., 2010). This hypothesis is questioned by the observation that genetically blocking lactate production in lung cancer does not activate oxidative phosphorylation in vivo yet still induces disease regression (Xie et al., 2014).
In contrast to cancer, T cells provide an excellent physiologic model to investigate the normal function of aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis. Indeed, aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis have recently been suggested to promote pro-inflammatory IFNγ synthesis and TH1 differentiation (Chang et al., 2013; Gubser et al., 2013; Klysz et al., 2015), respectively. Aerobic glycolysis also promotes anti-tumor T cell activity and differentiation into pro-inflammatory T helper 17 (TH17) over anti-inflammatory T regulatory (Treg) cells (Ho et al., 2015; Michalek et al., 2011; Shi et al., 2011). Several of these studies implicated specific pathway enzymes or metabolites, such as GAPDH, α-ketoglutarate and phosphoenolpyruvate, for control of IFNγ translation, TH1 differentiation and intracellular Ca2+ flux, respectively. However, these mechanisms are not easily generalizable to other cell types and/or do not consider the global consequences of metabolite shifts or the combined effects of aerobic glycolysis and glutaminolysis.
Asn (N)-linked protein glycosylation utilizes both glucose (Sharma et al., 2014) and glutamine, yet surprisingly, this pathway has not been investigated as a target of aerobic glycolysis and/or glutaminolysis. Branched N-glycans bind galectins at the cell surface to simultaneously inhibit the endocytosis and signaling of multiple surface receptors and transporters, thereby controlling cell growth, differentiation and disease states such as autoimmunity, cancer and type 2 diabetes (Demetriou et al., 2001; Dennis et al., 2009; Granovsky et al., 2000; Lau et al., 2007; Mkhikian et al., 2011; Ohtsubo et al., 2005; Partridge et al., 2004; Zhou et al., 2014). In T cells, N-glycan branching regulates development, growth, differentiation and autoimmunity by altering T