Dendritic cell-derived nitric oxide inhibits the differentiation of effector dendritic cells.

Dendritic cells (DCs) play a pivotal role in the development of effective immune defense while avoiding detrimental inflammation and autoimmunity by regulating the balance of adaptive immunity and immune tolerance. However, the mechanisms that govern the effector and regulatory functions of DCs are incompletely understood. Here, we show that DC-derived nitric oxide (NO) controls the balance of effector and regulatory DC differentiation. Mice deficient in the NO-producing enzyme inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) harbored increased effector DCs that produced interleukin-12, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-6 but normal numbers of regulatory DCs that expressed IL-10 and programmed cell death-1 (PD-1). Furthermore, an iNOS-specific inhibitor selectively enhanced effector DC differentiation, mimicking the effect of iNOS deficiency in mice. Conversely, an NO donor significantly suppressed effector DC development. Furthermore, iNOS−/− DCs supported enhanced T cell activation and proliferation. Finally iNOS−/− mice infected with the enteric pathogen Citrobacter rodentium suffered more severe intestinal inflammation with concomitant expansion of effector DCs in colon and spleen. Collectively, our results demonstrate that DC-derived iNOS restrains effector DC development, and offer the basis of therapeutic targeting of iNOS in DCs to treat autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.



The delicate immunological equilibrium between inflammation and tolerance is essential for the host to mount effective and controlled immune defense against noxious pathogens without causing destructive immunity against innocuous self-tissues or commensal microbes [1, 2]. Recent findings suggest that cells of both the innate and adaptive immune systems are important players in the decision between effector immunity and immune tolerance. Among the various immune cells, dendritic cells (DCs) are critical in processing and integrating various immunological cues to instruct the development of adaptive immunity. For example, effector DCs that secrete interleukin-12 (IL-12), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-6 and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) can promote T helper (Th) cell differentiation into Th1, Th2 or Th17 effector subsets respectively, thereby tailoring adaptive immunity to effectively control and eradicate infections. Regulatory DCs that express IL-10, programmed cell death-1 (PD-1), transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) and argininase suppress effector T cell activation and promote regulatory T cell (Treg) differentiation to enforce immune tolerance to self and commensal antigens. Therefore, uncontrolled effector or regulatory functions of DCs can result in either autoimmune and inflammatory diseases or pathological immune suppression. Despite the knowledge of many DC-extrinsic signals that influence effector and regulatory DC differentiation, DC-intrinsic mechanisms that underlie the differentiation of effector and regulatory DC cells are poorly understood.
Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) activity has been demonstrated in a wide array of cells and tissues [3, 4]. Nitric oxide (NO), the enzymatic product of iNOS, has diverse and important roles in host defense against a variety of pathogens [5, 6], neurotransmission, vascular functions, and immune regulation [8–12, 23]. NO is one of the smallest known bioactive products of mammalian cells. It is clear that NO is an important pro-inflammatory cytotoxic mediator that defends the host against various pathogens by inactivating and destroying infectious agents [13]. Interestingly, NO also plays critical roles in immune suppression [14]. Increasing evidence indicates that NO can affect the function of diverse immune cells, such as macrophage, T cells and DCs [8, 11, 13, 25]. However, it is not clear whether all immune cells express iNOS and what the function and mechanism of immune cell-derived iNOS is, particularly in the regulation of immunity and tolerance in autoimmune and inflammatory diseases [9, 10]. In this study, we show that DC-intrinsic iNOS is required to suppress effector DC differentiation and limit pathogenic inflammatory CD4+ T cell responses. DC-derived NO suppresses NF-kB signaling and inflammasome activation. Our results suggest that targeting DC-intrinsic iNOS may represent an efficient therapeutic strategy for immune and inflammatory diseases.

To investigate the function of NO in effector and regulatory DC differentiation, we first assessed the impact of iNOS deficiency on DC maturation ex vivo. Based on bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) culture, we obtained the 85% to 90% purity of BMDCs in WT or iNOS deficiency mice (Figure 1D and Supplementary Figure S1A). Lipopolysaccharide and IFN-γ treatment caused enhanced maturation of granulocyte and macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)- and IL-4-differentiated iNOS−/− CD11b+CD11c+ BMDCs than WT BMDCs, as evidenced by high expres