NFAT2 Regulates Generation of Innate-Like CD8+ T Lymphocytes and CD8+ T Lymphocytes Responses.

Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) 2 null mutant mice die in utero of cardiac failure, precluding analysis of the role of NFAT2 in lymphocyte responses. Only the NFAT2−/−/Rag-1−/− chimeric mice model gave insight into the role of NFAT2 transcription factor in T lymphocyte development, activation, and differentiation. As reports are mainly focused on the role of NFAT2 in CD4+ T lymphocytes activation and differentiation, we decided to investigate NFAT2’s impact on CD8+ T lymphocyte responses. We report that NFAT2 is phosphorylated and inactive in the cytoplasm of naive CD8+ T cells, and upon TCR stimulation, it is dephosphorylated and translocated into the nucleus. To study the role of NFAT2 in CD8+ T responses, we employed NFAT2fl/flCD4-Cre mice with NFAT2 deletion specifically in T cells. Interestingly, the absence of NFAT2 in T cells resulted in increased percentage of non-conventional innate-like CD8+ T cells. These cells were CD122+, rapid producer of interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and had characteristics of conventional memory CD8+ T cells. We also observed an expansion of PLZF+ expressing CD3+ thymocyte population in the absence of NFAT2 and increased IL-4 production. Furthermore, we found that CD8+ T lymphocytes deficient in NFAT2 had reduced activation, proliferation, and IFN-γ and IL-2 production at suboptimal TCR strength. NFAT2 absence did not significantly influence differentiation of CD8+ T cells into cytotoxic effector cells but reduced their IFN-γ production. This work documents NFAT2 as a negative regulator of innate-like CD8+ T cells development. NFAT2 is required for complete CD8+ T cell responses at suboptimal TCR stimulation and regulates IFN-γ production by cytotoxic CD8+ T cells in vitro.



CD8+ T cells are the key mediators in cell-mediated immunity against intracellular bacteria, viral infections, and tumor cells. Conventional CD8+ T cells develop in the thymus from a bone marrow-derived multipotent T cells progenitor through a series of defined and coordinated developmental stages of differentiation, positive and negative selection, and maturation. Mature single positive (SP) CD8+ T cells leave the thymus and migrate to peripheral lymphoid organs. In the peripheral lymphoid organs, naive CD8+ T cells, which are activated by specific antigens, differentiate into effector T cells that are able to kill target cells through the release of cytotoxic granules, secretion of cytokines, such as interferon gamma (IFN-γ) and Fas/FasL-dependent pathway. A small number of activated CD8+ T cells develop into memory T cells that provide long-term protection against reinfection (1). There are several subsets of memory CD8+ T cells, and among them, central and effector memory T cells (2). Central memory T cells express high level of CD62L and reside mainly in peripheral lymphoid organs, whereas effector memory T cells express low level of CD62L and are present mainly in non-lymphoid tissues. The development of effector or memory CD8+ T cells is dependent on the environment created by the innate immune system, for example, the presence of cytokines such as IL-12 promoting effector CD8+ T cells differentiation (3) or IL-7 and IL-15 required for the maintenance and survival of memory CD8+ T cells (4).
In addition to conventional CD8+ T cells, there are also several subsets of CD8+ T cells that acquire functions as a result of their maturation process rather than through antigen activation. These cells are believed to be selected by hematopoietic cells and are dependent on signals transduced through signaling lymphocyte activation molecule (SLAM) family members (5, 6). A subset of these cells, called memory-like or innate-like T cells, has been described in a few gene knockout animal models (5–14) and humans (15). These cells share characteristics with conventional memory CD8+ T cells, such as high expression of CD44 and CD122 (5, 6), and with innate cells as they can rapidly secrete IFN-γ upon stimulation (16). It has been reported that memory-like CD8+ T cells play important roles in the innate response against infections such as Listeria monocytogenes, chronic infections with viruses such as Herpes virus (17–19), and tumor cell lines in vitro (20).
Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) was originally described as a transcription factor inducing the expression of interleukin 2 (IL-2) (21). The NFAT family of transcription factors consists of five members, named NFAT1–5, and the main forms expressed in T cells are NFAT1 and NFAT2 (22). NFAT1 is constitutively expressed in T cells (23), whereas NFAT2 is induced upon T-cell receptor stimulation (24). NFAT proteins reside phosphorylated in the cytoplasm. In activated lymphocytes, NFAT is dephosphorylated by calcineurin (25–28), translocates from the cytoplasm into the nucleus (29–31), where coupled with other transcription factors (26, 32) binds to the 