The Hippo Pathway: Immunity and Cancer.

Since its discovery, the Hippo pathway has emerged as a central signaling network in mammalian cells. Canonical signaling through the Hippo pathway core components (MST1/2, LATS1/2, YAP and TAZ) is important for development and tissue homeostasis while aberrant signaling through the Hippo pathway has been implicated in multiple pathologies, including cancer. Recent studies have uncovered new roles for the Hippo pathway in immunology. In this review, we summarize the mechanisms by which Hippo signaling in pathogen-infected or neoplastic cells affects the activities of immune cells that respond to these threats. We further discuss how Hippo signaling functions as part of an immune response. Finally, we review how immune cell-intrinsic Hippo signaling modulates the development/function of leukocytes and propose directions for future work.



The immune system plays important roles in health and disease. Through various cell types and a multitude of secreted factors, the immune system defends the human body from internal and external threats. While the interactions of the immune system are complex, from a reductionist perspective, immune responses can be conceptualized as a series of signaling events occurring within and between immune cells, healthy cells, pathogen-infected cells and/or neoplastic cells. Indeed, specific signaling pathways (including NF-κB, Toll-like receptor (TLR), interferon (IFN) and JAK/STAT pathways) have been found to coordinate many of the intricacies of an immune response whereas dysregulated signaling resulting in altered immune function has been shown to contribute to disease pathology [1,2,3,4]. Given this, it is vital that we understand how particular signaling networks regulate immune processes in order to decipher mechanisms of disease and to identify opportunities for therapeutic intervention.

The Hippo signaling pathway was originally discovered through a series of genetic mosaic screens for genes augmenting cell proliferation and organ size in Drosophila [5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12]. In canonical Hippo signaling (Figure 1A), upstream stimuli activate the Hippo (Hpo) serine/threonine kinase. Hpo forms a complex with Salvador (Sav) scaffold protein and Mob as a tumour suppressor (Mats) adaptor protein to phosphorylate and activate serine/threonine kinase Warts (Wts aka. large tumour suppressor, lats) [8,9,10,11]. Wts subsequently phosphorylates transcriptional co-activator Yorkie (Yki) at key serine residues [13,14,15]. Phosphorylation of Yki by Wts leads to sequestration of Yki by 14-3-3 proteins in the cytoplasm. Thus, Yki is prevented from entering the nucleus to interact with Scalloped transcription factors, cannot trans-activate gene targets (e.g., Drosophila inhibitor of apoptosis protein 1 (Diap1)) and is functionally inhibited by Hippo signaling [13].
Since its discovery in Drosophila, homologs for each component of the Hippo pathway have been identified in other species. In mammals (Figure 1B), mammalian sterile 20-like kinase 1/2 (MST1/2) kinases associate with Salvador family WW domain containing protein 1 (SAV1) and Mps one binder kinase activator-like 1A and 1B (MOB1A/B or collectively, MOB1) to phosphorylate large tumour suppressor 1/2 (LATS1/2). LATS1/2 subsequently phosphorylate Yes-associated protein (YAP) as well as its paralog, WW domain-containing transcription regulator 1 (TAZ), leading to their binding by 14-3-3 [16,17,18,19]. YAP and TAZ are thereby prevented from entering the nucleus, interacting with transcription factors (i.e., TEAD family members and others) and regulating downstream gene targets [20,21,22,23,24].
The last decade has seen great advances in our understanding of the Hippo pathway. A diverse range of regulatory factors/cellular processes that influence MST1/2 and LATS1/2 activity have been uncovered including G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling, receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling, cell-cell contact and actin dynamics [25,26]. Non-canonical (“Hippo-independent”) interactions have been described for various components of Hippo signaling [27,28,29,30]. Finally, screens for downstream gene targets regulated by YAP and TAZ (e.g., CTGF and CYR61) have provided new insights into physiological/pathological functions of the Hippo pathway effectors [31,32,33].
A relatively recent development in the Hippo pathway field is literature investigating interactions between Hippo signaling and the immune system. In this review, we summarize the current evidence demonstrating a relationship between the Hippo pathway and immunology. We describe the mechanisms by which Hippo signaling in pathogen-infected cells regulates the recruitment and behaviour of the immune cells that respond to these pathologies. We further examine the emerging data linking dysregulated Hippo pathway activity in neoplastic cells with cancer immune evasion. We explain how Hippo signaling makes up part of an immune response. We then turn o