Programmed death one homolog maintains the pool size of regulatory T cells by promoting their differentiation and stability.

Programmed death one homolog (PD-1H) is an immunoglobulin superfamily molecule and primarily acts as a coinhibitor in the initiation of T cell response to antigens. Here, we report that genetic ablation of PD-1H in mice blocks the differentiation of naive T cells to Foxp3+ inducible Treg cells (iTreg) with a significant decrease of iTreg in lymphoid organs. This effect of PD-1H is highly specific for iTreg because both naturally generated iTreg in gut-related tissues and in vitro induced iTreg by TGF-β were decreased whereas the genesis of natural Treg (nTreg) remains normal. The suppressive function of both iTreg and nTreg, however, is not affected by the loss of PD-1H. In addition to decreased production, PD-1H deficient iTreg could also rapidly convert to CD4+ T helper 1 or T helper 17 cells in an inflammatory environment. Our results indicate that PD-1H is required for maintenance of iTreg pool size by promoting its differentiation and preventing its conversion to other CD4+ T cell subsets. These findings may have important implications for manipulating Tregs to control inflammation.



Regulatory T cells (Treg) are a subset of CD4+ T cells with broad functions from maintenance of self-tolerance to regulation of a magnitude of immune responses1–3. Treg are not terminally differentiated and can be converted to other CD4+ T cell subsets including Th1 and Th17 during inflammation4, 5. It has been shown that the transcription factor Foxp3 plays an essential role in the establishment of a functional and committed regulatory T cell lineage. Foxp3+ Treg cells can be divided into thymus-derived natural Treg cells (nTreg) and inducible Treg cells (iTreg) by TGF-β6, 7, which regulate the differentiation of iTreg cells and stabilization of thymus-derived nTreg8–11. In the periphery, the differentiation of iTreg cells is largely driven by the microenvironment. For example, inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ and IL-4 inhibit TGF-β-induced iTreg cells, while IL-6 directs Th17 cell differentiation in the presence of TGF-β12–14. The plasticity of Treg cells may thus determine the direction of an ongoing immune response and control inflammation as shown in several mouse models including models of colitis, acute graft versus host diseases (GVHD), and asthma15.
PD-1H (also called Gi24, Dies1, B7-H5, VISTA and DD1α) is a cell surface immunoglobulin superfamily molecule with immune modulatory functions in addition to its myriad of roles regulating the differentiation of osteoblast, adipocyte, and embryonic stem cells16–21 and cell apoptosis22. PD-1H is constitutively expressed on hematopoietic cells, such as T cells, NK cells, monocytes, and DCs, but not on B cells17, 21, 23. Unlike CTLA-4 knockout (KO) mice that rapidly develop lymphoproliferative phenotypes and fatal systemic autoimmune diseases24, PD-1H deficiency has a much more mild phenotype: young PD-1H KO mice have normal numbers of T cells, NK cells, B cells, macrophages, and monocytes, while older mice experience spontaneous T cell activation, and increased levels of memory cells and larger spleen size25, 26. Furthermore, PD-1H deficient mice were more susceptible to acute inflammation and immune response to antigens as shown in accelerated Con A-induced acute hepatitis and GVHD26. PD-1H has been shown to function on professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and T cells as either a ligand or a receptor, respectively, in several in vitro and in vivo studies25–27. Consistent with these findings, agonistic mAb to PD-1H have proven to be immune inhibitors for various types of immune responses to antigens26, whereas antagonistic mAb were shown to be immune stimulators28, 29. Although the counter-receptor(s) of PD-1H have yet to be identified, a recent study indicated that PD-1H/DD1α could mediate its effect via a hemophilic interaction22.
Our early studies show that PD-1H is constitutively expressed on Treg23 and several subsequent studies implicate its role in the regulation of Treg functions. PD-1HIg fusion protein promoted the induction of Foxp3+ iTreg in the presence of TGF-β in both mice and human CD4+ T cells in vitro
28, 29. Infusion of a PD-1H mAb in the B16-OVA tumour model reduced the differentiation of tumour antigen-specific iTreg cells. This result was interpreted as a blockade of the PD-1H interaction with its putative counter-receptor by this mAb28. A different PD-1H agonist mAb MH5A, however, was shown to promote TGF-β induced Treg cells in vitro, and infusion of MH5A suppressed progression of GVHD in mouse models, accompanied by expansion of iTreg30. While these data suggest a possible role for PD-1H in Treg induction and function, it has yet to be elucidated whether PD-1H has a direct effect on Treg cells. More importantly, the mechanisms underlying the modulatory effect of Treg cells by PD-1H are unknown. In this study, we show t