The Anti-Inflammatory Mediator, Vasoactive Intestinal Peptide, Modulates the Differentiation and Function of Th Subsets in Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Genetic background, epigenetic modifications, and environmental factors trigger autoimmune response in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Several pathogenic infections have been related to the onset of RA and may cause an inadequate immunological tolerance towards critical self-antigens leading to chronic joint inflammation and an imbalance between different T helper (Th) subsets. Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) is a mediator that modulates all the stages comprised between the arrival of pathogens and Th cell differentiation in RA through its known anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory actions. This “neuroimmunopeptide” modulates the pathogenic activity of diverse cell subpopulations involved in RA as lymphocytes, fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS), or macrophages. In addition, VIP decreases the expression of pattern recognition receptor (PRR) such as toll-like receptors (TLRs) in FLS from RA patients. These receptors act as sensors of pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) and damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) connecting the innate and adaptive immune system. Moreover, VIP modulates the imbalance between Th subsets in RA, decreasing pathogenic Th1 and Th17 subsets and favoring Th2 or Treg profile during the differentiation/polarization of naïve or memory Th cells. Finally, VIP regulates the plasticity between theses subsets. In this review, we provide an overview of VIP effects on the aforementioned features of RA pathology.



1. An Introduction to the Physiopathology of Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic inflammatory disease mainly manifested with peripheral polyarthritis. Genetic background, epigenetic modifications, and environmental factors are considered the aetiological factors that could cause an inadequate immunological tolerance towards critical self-antigens, characteristic of all autoimmune diseases [1, 2]. As consequence, chronic inflammation in the joints and an imbalance between different Th subsets are triggered in this pathology [2, 3]. Altered oral, intestinal, or lung microbiota, such as Porphyromonas gingivalis, Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Proteus mirabilis, Prevotella copri, or Mycoplasma fermentans, and other infectious agents such as EpStein-Barr virus interfere with the equilibrium between inflammation and tolerance [4–8]. They can trigger the pathology through molecular mimicry by means of two important characteristics, the generation of autoantibodies such as anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) or rheumatoid factor and the inflammatory response [1, 2].
The first step in the activation of an inflammatory response is the recognition of two kinds of ligands by specific receptors named PRRs. In the initial stages, they recognize the conserved molecular structures expressed by invading microbes named pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). The uncontrolled inflammation in chronic diseases leads to tissue damage generating endogenous danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) including stress signals such as damaged or apoptotic cells [9–11], representing the second kind of ligands recognized by PRRs [11]. The stimulation of these receptors produces the expression of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α, interleukin- (IL-) 6, IL-1β, or IL-12 by several innate cells such as dendritic cells (DCs) or macrophages, which link innate and adaptive immunity. Inflammation in RA patients is maintained by sustained activation of multiple inflammatory positive-feedback regulatory pathways in a variety of cells [12]. As a consequence of all these processes that have been unleashed in early RA, there is an alteration in the balance between the different subpopulations of Th lymphocytes. Paracrine and autocrine actions of cytokines, along with persistent adaptive immune responses, can perpetuate the disease and ultimately lead to cartilage and bone destruction in the joints [1].
Naïve CD4+ T helper cells can differentiate into Th1, Th2, Th17, Th9, Th22, follicular helper T (Tfh), and regulatory T (Treg). Th subset differentiation is orchestrated by complex regulatory networks that allow for shared transcriptional programs and plasticity across T cell subsets [13, 14]. Among all subtypes of Th cells, Th17 are the most heterogeneous and plastic subsets [13–15]. The heterogeneity of Th phenotypes generated in the primary response is mirrored in the heterogeneity of memory Th cells that persist once the pathogen has been eliminated [16]. This heterogeneity of Th cells serves to target the cells to the tissues where they are needed and to define the class of immune and tissue response that is appropriate for the type of pathogen attack. However, some of these subpopulations have been related to a greater or lesser extent with the malfunctions of the immune system, specifi