Integration of T‐cell receptor, Notch and cytokine signals programs mouse γδ T‐cell effector differentiation.

Abstract
γδ T‐cells perform a wide range of tissue‐ and disease‐specific functions that are dependent on the effector cytokines produced by these cells. However, the aggregate signals required for the development of interferon‐γ (IFNγ) and interleukin‐17 (IL‐17) producing γδ T‐cells remain unknown. Here, we define the cues involved in the functional programming of γδ T‐cells, by examining the roles of T‐cell receptor (TCR), Notch, and cytokine‐receptor signaling. KN6 γδTCR‐transduced Rag2
−/− T‐cell progenitors were cultured on stromal cells variably expressing TCR and Notch ligands, supplemented with different cytokines. We found that distinct combinations of these signals are required to program IFNγ versus 
IL‐17 producing γδ T‐cell subsets, with Notch and weak TCR ligands optimally enabling development of γδ17 cells in the presence of IL‐1β, IL‐21 and IL‐23. Notably, these cytokines were also shown to be required for the intrathymic development of γδ17 cells. Together, this work provides a framework of how signals downstream of TCR, Notch and cytokine receptors integrate to program the effector function of IFNγ and IL‐17 producing γδ T‐cell subsets.



γδ T‐cells are able to perform a wide range of species, tissue‐ and disease‐specific functions that include tumor surveillance, tissue healing, pathogen clearance and acting as the interface between the innate and adaptive immune responses.1, 2 Depending on the context, the same effector functions that make γδ T‐cells an important arm of the immune system can alternatively contribute to the development, progression and exacerbation of various diseases. These harmful effects include roles in the pathogenesis of autoimmune conditions such as psoriasis, multiple sclerosis, and arthritis, as well as contributions to breast cancer metastasis and bone loss.3, 4, 5, 6, 7 Given that the beneficial and deleterious effects of γδ T‐cells are largely attributable to the ability of these cells to rapidly produce high levels of inflammatory cytokines, it is important to understand the development and function of the major effector subtypes.
The most commonly studied effector subsets of mouse γδ T‐cells fall into the interferon‐γ (IFNγ) or IL‐17 producing (γδ17) categories. Although it is generally accepted that both subtypes are programmed in the thymus, the exact set of events leading to their functional differentiation remains controversial. In particular, several distinct, and sometimes contradictory, mechanisms have been proposed as important for γδ17 cell differentiation.8 Initial reports suggested that antigen experienced γδ T‐cells, which had received ligand‐dependent TCR signals, mature as IFNγ producers, while antigen naïve cells differentiate toward the γδ17 lineage.9 Furthermore, in the past decade, there have been several reports debating the importance of different degrees of TCR signaling in the generation of γδ17 cells.10, 11, 12, 13 The signal strength hypothesis asserts that the quantity of the signal downstream of the TCR can direct lineage choice.8 TCR signaling activates the ERK‐Egr3 pathway, which results in the upregulation of Id3 in direct proportion to the strength of signal.14 Moreover, high ERK signaling has been shown to repress the development of γδ17 cells,15 and Id3 activity can repress the activity of HEB, which is required for γδ17 development.16 However, very few γδTCR ligands are known, complicating attempts to control γδTCR signal strength in order to investigate the extent its influence on γδ T‐cell effector programming.
Another subject of controversy with regard to γδ17 development is the involvement of cytokines. Early reports by Lochner et al. suggested that the mechanism of γδ17 programming differed from that of Th17, as it did not rely on IL‐6.17 Noting the relevance of IL‐23 in γδ17 mediated autoimmune pathogenesis, Sutton and colleagues demonstrated that IL‐1β and IL‐23 could induce the production of IL‐17 by innate‐like γδ T‐cells in the periphery.18 However, other reports have shown that IL‐17 production by γδ T‐cells in the intestinal mucosa is IL‐23 independent, despite these cells being IL‐23R+.8 Furthermore, Nurieva et al. noticed an almost complete absence of IL‐17 production by γδ T‐cells in the periphery of IL‐21−/− mice.19 Although these studies did not demonstrate relevance of these cytokines to thymic programming of γδ17 cells, they provided a rationale for assessing this possibility.
Notch signaling has also been implicated as a driver of γδ17 differentiation. Evidence for the involvement of the Notch1 pathway has been ascribed to various aspects of IL‐17 producing cell differentiation, such as regulation of Rorc (RORγt) and IL‐23R expression; it has also been shown to act as a metabolic regulator in Th17 cells.20, 21, 22 The main evidence for a role of Notch signaling in γδ17 T‐cells is derived from work