The Differential Roles of T Cells in Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and Obesity.

Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) constitutes a spectrum of disease states characterized by hepatic steatosis and is closely associated to obesity and the metabolic syndrome. In non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), additionally, inflammatory changes and hepatocellular damage are present, representing a more severe condition, for which the treatment is an unmet medical need. Pathophysiologically, the immune system is one of the main drivers of NAFLD progression and other obesity-related comorbidities, and both the innate and adaptive immune system are involved. T cells form the cellular component of the adaptive immune system and consist of multiple differentially active subsets, i.e., T helper (Th) cells, regulatory T (Treg) cells, and cytotoxic T (Tc) cells, as well as several innate T-cell subsets. This review focuses on the role of these T-cell subsets in the pathogenesis of NAFLD, as well as the association with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, reviewing the available evidence from both animal and human studies. Briefly, Th1, Th2, Th17, and Th22 cells seem to have an attenuating effect on adiposity. Th2, Th22, and Treg cells seem to decrease insulin resistance, whereas Th1, Th17, and Tc cells have an aggravating effect. Concerning NAFLD, both Th22 and Treg cells appear to have an overall tempering effect, whereas Th17 and Tc cells seem to induce more liver damage and fibrosis progression. The evidence regarding the role of the innate T-cell subsets is more controversial and warrants further exploration.



Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized by the presence of hepatic steatosis without causes for secondary hepatic fat accumulation and is comprised of a spectrum of multiple disease states, going from non-alcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) to non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) to NAFLD-related advanced liver disease with all its complications. The presence of steatosis in conjunction with both lobular inflammation and ballooning of the hepatocytes—a histological sign of hepatocellular damage—defines NASH, which may be accompanied by progressive fibrosis. When these histological trademarks of NASH are not both present, the term NAFL is used (1, 2). The distinction between these two disease states is of utmost importance, as NASH represents a more active side of the spectrum with a more rapid progression to advanced liver disease (1). A close relationship has been highlighted between NAFLD and the metabolic syndrome, clustering visceral overweight, dyslipidaemia, insulin resistance, and arterial hypertension (2). This has led to the generally accepted idea that NAFLD is the hepatic manifestation of the metabolic syndrome (3). Obesity, in particular, is the most common and well-documented risk factor for NAFLD, and in itself represents an enormous public health issue, taking on epidemic proportions and predisposing for a myriad of comorbidities, including type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2), cardiovascular disease and malignancy. Moreover, in NAFLD, obesity was shown to be an independent predictor of fibrosis progression, development of NASH, and mortality (4). As is the case for obesity and DM2, the prevalence of NAFLD is increasing in many Western countries, reaching 25–30% in the general population and 42–72% in patients affected by DM2 (1, 5). Importantly, NAFLD has become one of the three major causes of cirrhosis, is associated with the occurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma—even in a non-cirrhotic state—and is an independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease, underlining the vast burden on public health (6–8). Additionally, it has been suggested that NAFLD itself is implicated in the pathophysiology of DM2, establishing a multidirectional disease state (9).
The pathogenesis of NASH is complex and involves a crosstalk between various metabolically active tissues. A multitude of processes may contribute to liver damage and inflammation, including insulin resistance, hepatic fatty acid accumulation, oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and a systemic proinflammatory state. These multiple hits probably take place in parallel, rather than consecutively, hence the term “multiple parallel hits hypothesis” (10, 11). Importantly, NAFLD is no longer considered an exclusively hepatic disease, as multiple other organ systems participate in the pathogenesis of liver inflammation (10). Two key players are especially of interest, being on the one hand the gut, through dysregulation of the microbiome, and on the other hand the adipose tissue (10, 12, 13). Considering the latter, obesity predisposes to adipose tissue hypertrophy, resulting in increased lipolysis, as well as adipose tissue inflammation. Collectively, these features result in adipose tissue dysfunction, which is characterized by an impaired adipokine secretion and a higher release of free fatty acids, and is critically involved i