The Intracellular Free Zinc Level Is Vital for Treg Function and a Feasible Tool to Discriminate between Treg and Activated Th Cells.

The intracellular free zinc level and zinc distribution are important for cellular function. Both are highly variable and are altered due to intrinsic zinc pool fluctuation via buffering and muffling reactions. Multiple autoimmune diseases are associated with pathologically changed zinc levels, which provoke altered signal transduction leading to changed immune responses, cell differentiation, and function. For instance, immunological tolerance can be impaired, causing autoimmune diseases because of a malfunction of regulatory T cells (Tregs). We investigated the intracellular free zinc concentration of resting and activated T helper (Th) cells and Tregs in an allogeneic graft versus host disease model using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) analysis and enlightened cell function under nontoxic zinc concentrations and zinc deficiency by detecting cytokine secretion via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). We exhibited for the first time that Tregs could be explicitly discriminated from other Th cell subsets using significantly increased intracellular free zinc levels. Moreover, the intracellular free zinc level was essential in maintaining the Treg phenotype and function, since zinc deficiency favored the pro-inflammatory immune response. Therefore, we hypothesize that the intracellular free zinc level in Th cells is essential in guaranteeing proper cellular function and can be used to discriminate Tregs from other Th cell subsets.



Since the early 1960s, zinc has been discovered to be essential in humans. Proper zinc homeostasis is indispensable to an adequate immune response, since zinc deficiency is known to increase the incidence of bacterial or viral infections, the development of cancer, graft rejection, and autoimmune diseases [1,2,3]. In line with that, studies have uncovered a correlation between patients suffering from multiple sclerosis (MS) and lowered plasma zinc levels, as well as lower zinc concentrations in chronic MS lesions [2,4,5]. Additionally, dietary deficiency has been shown to be associated with the risk and development of pathogenic pro-inflammatory T cells in an MS mice model [6,7]. It is well known that especially T cells are affected by altered zinc levels, as shown in T cell development, maturation, activation, and differentiation [8,9,10]. Thus, zinc deficiency can lead to reduced proliferation, reduced response to mitogens, thymic atrophy, a selective decrease in Th cells (CD4-expressing T cells), and overall altered T cell differentiation [11,12,13,14].
Interestingly, zinc supplementation in nontoxic doses is well known to beneficially influence malfunctioning immunological processes. For instance, the zinc deficiency-induced shift of the T helper (Th) subset differentiation from Th1 to Th2 can be reversed by zinc supplementation. Th2-mediated allergic immunoreactions are reduced, and the protecting immunoreaction against invading bacteria or viruses is restored, thus re-establishing proper immune function [15]. Besides Th1 and Th2 differentiation, regulatory T cell (Treg) differentiation and stability can also be modulated by zinc in allogeneic immunoreactions [16,17,18]. This is of fundamental importance, since Treg therapy in clinical trials seems to be promising in treating different diseases like organ-specific and systemic autoimmune diseases and in graft acceptance in transplantation [19,20,21,22].
Although graft rejections and the development of autoimmune diseases are associated with a disturbed zinc homeostasis, a suboptimal zinc status in patients cannot easily be determined or correlated with diseases due to the lack of clinical signs and reliable biomarkers. Until now, no specific and reliable biomarker of zinc status in men has been found [23]. This is due to the effects of multiple confounders such as infection, inflammatory conditions, and time and composition of the last meal [24]. Hence, plasma zinc level can stay normal while the intracellular free zinc level may change, leading to altered signal transduction and cell function. 
The intracellular free zinc level has been recognized as important for T cell activation because zinc acts as a second messenger in signal transduction [25]. A modest increase can have profound effects on signaling pathways originating from the T cell receptor (TCR) [26], cytokine receptors [27,28,29], and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) [30]. Raised zinc concentrations inhibit the activity of intracellular kinases [31,32,33] and phosphatases [34,35] that in turn affect signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling networks and the associated transcription factor activity. Therefore, regulating the intracellular free zinc level offers the potential to influence the development of Th cell effector function and to prevent dis