The Use of Human Mesenchymal Stem Cells as Therapeutic Agents for the in vivo Treatment of Immune-Related Diseases: A Systematic Review.

Background: One of the greatest challenges for medicine is to find a safe and effective treatment for immune-related diseases. However, due to the low efficacy of the treatment available and the occurrence of serious adverse effects, many groups are currently searching for alternatives to the traditional therapy. In this regard, the use of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) represents a great promise for the treatment of a variety of immune-related diseases due to their potent immunomodulatory properties. The main objective of this study is, therefore, to present and summarize, through a systematic review of the literature, in vivo studies in which the efficacy of the administration of hMSCs for the treatment of immune-related diseases was evaluated.
Methods: The article search was conducted in PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus and Web of Science databases. Original research articles assessing the therapeutic potential of hMSCs administration for the in vivo treatment immune-related diseases, published from 1984 to December 2017, were selected and evaluated.
Results: A total of 132 manuscripts formed the basis of this systematic review. Most of the studies analyzed reported positive results after hMSCs administration. Clinical effects commonly observed include an increase in the survival rates and a reduction in the severity and incidence of the immune-related diseases studied. In addition, hMSCs administration resulted in an inhibition in the proliferation and activation of CD19+ B cells, CD4+ Th1 and Th17 cells, CD8+ T cells, NK cells, macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils. The clonal expansion of both Bregs and Tregs cells, however, was stimulated. Administration of hMSCs also resulted in a reduction in the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IFN-γ, TNF-α, IL-1, IL-2, IL-12, and IL-17 and in an increase in the levels of immunoregulatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13.
Conclusions: The results obtained in this study open new avenues for the treatment of immune-related diseases through the administration of hMSCs and emphasize the importance of the conduction of further studies in this area.



Autoimmune diseases result from defects in the mechanisms of immunological tolerance, culminating in the activation of cellular and humoral mechanisms of the immune response against self-antigens (1, 2). As a result, in autoimmune diseases, a failure occurs in the body's ability to differentiate cells from the body from foreign cells. These diseases may be restricted to a particular organ or be systemic (3). Examples of autoimmune diseases include type I diabetes mellitus, myasthenia gravis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus and systemic sclerosis. The mechanism and causes of the occurrence of autoimmune diseases are still not well-understood, however, it is believed that the origin of the majority of these diseases is multifactorial, in which both genetic and environmental factors are involved (4–6). Due to the possible occurrence of bone marrow toxicity, caused by the immunosuppressive regimen currently applied in the conventional treatment (7) of these diseases, the use of human mesenchymalstem cells (hMSCs) is being proposed as an alternative to treat these patients. For instance, a study conducted by Joly et al. (8) reported an increase in the mortality rate and the occurrence of severe adverse effects such as sepsis and diabetes mellitus requiring insulin in patients with extensive bullous pemphigoid treated with 1 mg of prednisone per kilogram per day, compared to patients treated with only topical corticosteroids. In addition, despite being effective in the treatment of pemphigus (9, 10), the combination of rituximab and prednisone is associated with the occurrence of many adverse events such as diabetes, endocrine disorders, myopathy and bone disorders, which complicates the treatment of this disease (10). Other autoimmune diseases, such as epidermolysis bullosa acquisita are notoriously difficult to treat by the conventional treatment, as demonstrated in a study conducted by Kim et al. (11). This emphasizes the need for the elaboration of alternative therapies. In this regard, the use of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) has been studied as an alternative for the treatment of immune-related diseases due their intrinsic immunomodulatory properties.
Mesenchymal stem cells are multipotent cells capable of self renewal and differentiation into several cell lines, including chondrocytes, adipocytes and osteoblasts (12, 13). Despite the fact that this type of stem cells isusually isolated from bone marrow (12), they can also be obtained from several neonatal and adult tissues, including dental pulp (14), umbilical cord (15), orbicularis oris muscle (16), and fat (17). In addition, some studies reported successful differentiation of pluripotent ste