Alteration at a Single Amino Acid Residue in the T Cell Receptor α Chain Complementarity Determining Region 2 Changes the Differentiation of Naive Cd4 T Cells in Response to Antigen from T Helper Cell Type 1 (Th1) to Th2

To study whether changes in the structure of a T cell receptor (TCR) at a single peptide-contacting residue could affect T cell priming with antigenic peptide, we made transgenic mice with a point mutation in the TCR α chain of the D10.G4.1 (D10) TCR and bred them to D10 β chain transgenic mice. The mutation consisted of a leucine to serine substitution at position 51 (L51S), which we had already established contacted the second amino acid of the peptide such that the response to the reference peptide was reduced by ∼100-fold. A mutation in the reference peptide CA134–146 (CA-WT) from the arginine at peptide position 2 to glycine (R2G) restored full response to this altered TCR. When we examined in vitro priming of naive CD4 T cells, we observed that the response to doses of CA-WT that induced T helper cell type 1 (Th1) responses in naive CD4 T cells from mice transgenic for the D10 TCR gave only Th2 responses in naive CD4 T cells derived from the L51S. However, when we primed the same T cells with the R2G peptide, we observed Th1 priming in both D10 and L51S naive CD4 T cells. We conclude from these data that a mutation in the TCR at a key position that contacts major histocompatibility complex–bound peptide is associated with a shift in T cell differentiation from Th1 to Th2.



The TCR of CD4 T lymphocytes recognizes immunogenic peptide sequences bound within the groove of MHC class II molecules 1. Such recognition results in a signal that is transmitted through the TCR, activates intracellular signal transduction pathways, and culminates in the proliferation and differentiation of CD4 T cells into effector cells that execute many functions 2. Naive CD4 T cells may differentiate into either Th1 or Th2 cells 3. Th1 cells mediate inflammatory responses, activate macrophages, and stimulate cell-mediated immunity. Th2 cells activate B cells, stimulate humoral immunity, and are prominent mediators of allergic responses 4. The choice of differentiation into either Th1 or Th2 cells is a crucial step that determines the direction of the subsequent adaptive immune response. This choice is influenced by many factors including the interaction between the TCR and the peptide–MHC complex 5. The cytokine environment where the CD4 T cell meets its ligand is as important as the details of the direct engagement of its TCR by that ligand. In vitro studies have shown that the predominance of IL-4 or IL-6 drives Th2 differentiation, whereas the predominance of IFN-γ or IL-12 drives Th1 differentiation. The source of the initial IL-4 in vivo can be either NK1.1+ CD4 T cells 6, or naive CD4 T cells that have encountered IL-6–producing APCs 7. The source of the initial IFN-γ can be NK cells, CD8 T cells, or naive CD4 T cells that have encountered IL-12–producing APCs 8. Different pathogens trigger different innate immune mechanisms that favor one cytokine environment over the other. These mechanisms are probably related to the antigenic makeup of the pathogen, its route of entry, and the type and condition of the APC that initially responds to its presence 9
We are beginning to understand the factors central to the TCR–peptide–MHC complex that influence CD4 T cell differentiation. In general, a longer duration of contact between the TCR and its ligand results in a full signal through the TCR and subsequent Th1 differentiation 5
11. Partial signals favor Th2 differentiation. The duration of contact is in turn influenced by several factors such as: (a) high density of peptide–MHC ligand on the surface of the APC, (b) the stability of the complex between the peptide and the MHC molecule, and (c) a longer half-life of TCR–peptide–MHC complexes.
Only three to five amino acids within a peptide bound in the groove of MHC molecules face outwards into the solvent for potentially direct contacts with TCR amino acids 12
14. Similarly, although many amino acids constitute the framework of the TCR α and β chains, only a few amino acids have been established to directly contact peptide amino acids 15
21. Functional studies that supported these findings came from experiments with altered peptide ligands (APLs). APLs are peptide variants that have been structurally designed to contain single amino acid substitutions at key TCR contact residues 22. APLs are still presented by the same MHC class II molecule and recognized by the same TCR. However, this recognition results in marked alterations in the nature of the signal received by the TCR. APLs were first shown to stimulate IL-4 production from Th2 clones that were capable of providing B cell help but failed to induce proliferation 23. APLs also stimulated Th1 clones to express IL-2 receptor and exhibit cytotoxic function without stimulating proliferation or cytokine production 24. The biochemical basis for the selective induction of these effector functions was shown to lie in incomplete phosphorylation of the CD3 chains, lack of recruitment and phosphorylation of Src homology 2 (SH2)-containing kinases, and distinct quantitative differences in calcium mobilization patterns 22. Whereas low doses of agonist peptides resulted in phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the TCR-associated ζ chain and the tyrosine kinase ZAP-70, 100–1,000-fold higher doses of partial agonist peptides were required to observe the same effect.
It was further shown that stimulation of CD4 T cells by APLs versus agonist peptides influenced CD4 T cell differentiation. These observations supported previous studies where the MHC haplotype of the APC was found to influence CD4 T cell differentiation 25. I-As molecules that bound human collagen IV–derived immunogenic peptides 20,000 times more avidly than I-Ab favored differentiation of responding CD4 T cells along the Th1 path. Increasing the dose of antigen by immunizing I-Ab mice with higher doses of peptide was capable of generating Th1 responses. At a given dose, agonist peptides that formed high affinity interactions with the MHC molecule could engage the TCR longer, favoring Th1 differentiation, whereas APLs having altered affinities either to the presenting MHC molecule or to the TCR favored Th2 differentiation 26. Similarly, by varying the dose of a given peptide (agonist or APL), higher doses were shown to favor Th1 differentiation, whereas lower doses favored Th2 differentiation 27. To accomplish the same effect, the dose of the partial agonist peptide had to be 100–1,000-fold higher than the full agonist peptide. The differential outcome of CD4 T cell differentiation was also associated with biochemical alterations proximal to the TCR 28. Thus, the density and stability of interactions between the peptide and the MHC influence signals generated through the TCR.
In summary, all of the above studies have dissected the role of the trimolecular TCR–peptide–MHC complex on CD4 T cell differentiation by introducing changes in the peptide–MHC component. These changes are in turn interpreted by the TCR, as evidenced in qualitative and quantitative changes in the resultant intracellular biochemical signals. The direct change in the TCR itself described in this study is a novel approach to address the following question: Can two different TCRs recognize the same MHC–peptide ligand with different outcomes? Similar to the design of APLs, we have designed an altered TCR by substituting one amino acid in the TCR α chain at a key position that contacts MHC-bound peptide. We describe the behavior of this altered TCR compared with its parent TCR by generating transgenic mice bearing either TCR and studying the proliferation and differentiation of purified naive CD4 T cells from these two transgenic mice stimulated by the same peptide–MHC ligand. Whereas the parent TCR bearing CD4 T cells became Th1-like at high doses of peptide, the altered TCR bearing CD4 T cells became Th2-like at those same doses. Thus, subtle variations in the TCR can influence the outcome of CD4 T cell differentiation.

The mutagenesis of the D10.G4.1 (D10) TCR α chain has been described previously 29. In brief, mutagenesis was performed using the overlapping extension method. The D10 TCR α chain was used as a template DNA. The mutation was produced by standard PCR methods to produce a substitution at amino acid position 51 of leucine to serine (L51S) in the TCR α chain. The mutagenesis was verified by DNA sequencing.

The D10 transgenic mice were generated by microinjection of the rearranged genes encoding the D10 α and β chain TCR as described 15. Similarly, the L51S α chain carrying the transgene was microinjected into day 1 C3H/B6 embryos. The transgenic founder was backcrossed to B10.BR and further backcrossed to single D10 β chain transgenic mice (D10 β chain transgenic mice are described in reference 15). Both D10 and L51S TCR transgenic mice were further backcrossed to Cα−/− 129s mice. Homozygous Cα−/−, either carrying the transgenes or not, were selected for further breeding. The lines were maintained by breeding transgenic Cα−/− mice with nontransgenic Cα−/− mice. Transgenic mice were identified by screening tail DNA by PCR for the presence of the transgene using D10 TCR α and β chain–specific primers. For the α chain, the forward primer sequence was 5′ of the ATG, and the reverse primer sequence was 3′ of Jα within the intron between Jα and Cα. The sequences were as follows: D10 Vα forward primer, 5′tttctcccaaacttcagtcta3′, and D10 Vα reverse primer, 5′gctctggtcattggcacgat3′. For the β chain, the forward primer sequence was within the leader, and the reverse primer sequence was 3′ of Jβ within the intron between Jβ and Cβ. The sequences were as follows: D10 Vβ forward primer, 5′-gcattctagatggtcccaagatgggc-3′, and D10 Vβ reverse primer, 5′-ttaaggatccactctgctaaggttttctgc-3′. PCR co