Comparative Study of Hematopoietic Differentiation between Human Embryonic Stem Cell Lines

Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into any desired cell type has been hailed as a therapeutic promise to cure many human diseases. However, substantial roadblocks still exist for in vitro differentiation of hESCs into distinct cell types, including T lymphocytes. Here we examined the hematopoietic differentiation potential of six different hESC lines. We compare their ability to develop into CD34+ or CD34+CD45+ hematopoietic precursor populations under several differentiation conditions. Comparison of lymphoid potential of hESC derived- and fetal tissue derived-hematopoietic precursors was also made. We found diverse hematopoietic potential between hESC lines depending on the culture or passage conditions. In contrast to fetal-derived hematopoietic precursors, none of the CD34+ precursors differentiated from hESCs were able to develop further into T cells. These data underscore the difficulties in the current strategy of hESC forward differentiation and highlight distinct differences between CD34+ hematopoietic precursors generated in vitro versus in vivo.



Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into a variety of cell types has vast promise in the context of personalized human therapeutics and also towards understanding developmental paradigms. Specifically, hESC-derived hematopoietic subsets could theoretically be used for a variety of therapeutic purposes such as replenishment of lymphocyte deficiency due to chemotherapy, suppression of autoimmunity by regulatory T cells, or T cell mediated anti-tumor therapy. However, we first need to establish a robust and repeatable protocol for in vitro differentiation.
Differences in lineage potential among independently derived hESC lines has been noted for a number of downstream target cell types and at different stages of development. In addition to gene expression heterogeneity among the hESC lines themselves, lineage skewing among hESC lines has been identified as early as commitment to the three germ layers [1]–[6]. In other reports, lineage bias between hESC lines is detected at the latest stages of development—definitive differentiation of forebrain versus hindbrain neurons, for example [7]. For the hematopoietic lineage, the potential of hESCs to develop into blood lineage cells has primarily been addressed with a restricted number of stem cell lines and differentiation methods. Several groups have reported success in generating erythrocytes, various myeloid lineage cells, B cells, and NK cells from hESCs, albeit differentiation of B cells was based primarily on expression of lineage markers rather than functional assays [8]–[17]. However, generation of T lymphocytes from the same hESC lines has been difficult to achieve, despite the fact that mouse ESCs can be easily induced to differentiate toward the T cell lineage by co-culturing with Notch-1 ligand expressing stromal cells [18]. One group has verified T lineage potential from the H1 hESC line through in vivo passage of hESC-derived hematopoietic progenitor cells in a humanized mouse model [19], [20]. Recently, another group reported generation of T cells from what they refer to as “hematopoietic zones” in vitro
[21]. This is currently the sole successful report of in vitro T cell differentiation. However, under similar conditions, another group reported a strong lineage bias against the development of T lineage cells from hESCs, and rather an NK lineage pre-disposition [15]. These discrepancies in T lineage differentiation potential between labs using similar protocols, and the low efficiency of T cell development in successful labs highlights a need for improved understanding of hESC culture conditions and differentiation protocols before becoming clinically useful.
The basis for these differences in lineage potential among hESC lines are not completely understood but could stem from a number of variables including, but not limited to, genetic background, the quality and stage of the embryo at derivation, and the hESC isolation method. In addition, the sensitivity of hESC lines to experimental variability make it extremely difficult to compare the differentiation potential of hESC lines indirectly via published results.
Here, we set out to establish the hematopoietic and lymphoid potential of a sampling of hESC lines from various sources under different culture conditions and differentiation protocols in a side-by-side comparison at different stages of differentiation. We found significant differences in hematopoietic potential among independent hESC lines, differences in blood lineage development under different passage conditions regardless of karyotypic abnormalities, and disparities under unique directed differentiation protocols. These lineage biases were identified early in hematopoietic development and also at subsequent stages of lymphoid development. In contrast, ex vivo hematopoietic progenitors developed consistently and efficiently into lymphoid cells, specifically the T cell lineage, under the same in vitro differentiation conditions.

We sought to compare the hematopoietic potential of several hESC lines from different sources. In this analysis we included one human ES cell line reportedly skewed toward mesoderm (HuES8), one toward endoderm (HuES14), one not described (HuES15), the two lines most prevalently used by others for hESC-hematopoietic differentiation, H1 and H9, and another independently-derived hESC cell line, HSF-6 [4], [22], [23].
First, we analyzed the proportion of each hESC line that gave rise to putative hemangioblasts (CD34+CD45−) and hematopoietic progenitor cells (CD34+CD45+) under various passage and differentiation parameters (Fig. 1). We compared the affect of enzymatic (trypsin treatment) versus manual passage on hematopoietic development. To assess the initial commitment to the hematopoietic lineage, we allowed hESCs to differentiate into embryoid bodies (EB) or co-cultured hESCs on an OP9 mouse bone marrow stromal cell monolayer in the absence of lineage skewing cytokines. Consistently, and regardless of cell line, manual passage gave rise to a higher proportion of hESCs differentiating to CD34+ cells in EB culture (Fig. 1A). Under the same differentiation conditions, enzymatically passaged hESCs also failed to up-regulate CD45, a marker indicative of hematopoietic commitment. In contrast, under the same differentiation conditions, CD45 was detectable on all the hESC lines maintained through manual passage (Fig. 1A). It has been shown that enzymatic passage of hESCs can lead to an increased frequency of karyotype abnormalities [6], [24]. Therefore, we also performed karyotype analysis periodically to determine gross karyotypic changes under different culture conditions. Trypsin-passaged HuES8, HuES14, and HuES15 hESC cultures consistently displayed gross karyotype abnormalities (Fig. 1B). However, no significant karyotype abnormalities were observed in H1 or H9 trypsin-passaged hESC cultures, nor were any chromosomal abnormalities noted in any of the manually passaged cultures. All hESC lines used throughout the manuscript maintained normal karyotypes with the exception of the top panel of Figure 1A, as noted.

Comparative analysis of hemangioblast development from independently-derived hESC lines.
Several hESC lines were differentiated as embryoid bodies (EB) for nine days after several trypsin passages (A, top panel) or after several manual passages (A, middle panel) in EB media without lineage-skewing cytokines. CD34+ and CD34+CD45+ development was determined by flow cytometric analysis of several cell surface markers indicative of differentiation state. The proportion of hESC-derived CD34+CD45− cells is presented on differentiating hESCs in black. The proportion of CD34+CD45+ progenitors is indicated in white. HuES8, HuES14, and HuES15 cell lines were highly susceptible to gross karyotypic abnormalities during trypsin passage (as indicated). H1, H9, and HSF6 manually passaged cells had previously been passaged with trypsin (>5 manual passages before differentiation). (A, bottom panel) Independently-derived hESC were differentiated on an OP9 monolayer for nine days, and CD34 and CD45 cell surface expression analyzed by flow cytometry. Two representative experiments of each condition are presented. (B) Abnormal karyotypes observed in trypsin passaged cells. (C) Representative time course of CD34 expression on manually passaged, independently-derived hESCs differentiated as EBs or on an OP9 monolayer. CD34 expression was analyzed on days 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18.

We next analyzed the propensity of manually passaged hESC lines to generate CD34+ and CD34+CD45+ using a complementary differentiation system. Undifferentiated hESCs were harvested and plated on a monolayer of OP9 mouse bone marrow stromal cells capable of promoting hematopoietic development. Again, CD34 and CD45 expression were monitored by flow cytometry. Overall, all hESC lines consistently gave rise to CD34-expressing cells. However, several differences in the differentiation potential were noted using the two different protocols. Cell-surface CD45 was not detected at any time point on hESCs differentiated in the OP9 co-culture system (Fig. 1A, bottom panel and data not shown). In addition, although the H1 line consistently had a higher proportion of CD34+ cells in both differentiation conditions, other hESC lines, specifically H9 and HSF6 generated proportionally more CD34+ cells in the OP9 co-culture system as compared with the EB condition. We also observed that the kinetics of cell-surface CD34 expression differed significantly between hESC lines and the differentiation protocols (Fig. 1C).
The CD34+ population contains developmental intermediates capable of giving rise to multiple lineages. To compare the potential of CD34+ cells derived from independent 