E-Cadherin Marks a Subset of Inflammatory Dendritic Cells that Promote T Cell-Mediated Colitis

Summary
Dendritic cells (DCs) play a pivotal role in controlling the balance between tolerance and immunity in the intestine. Gut conditioned CD103+ DCs promote regulatory T (Treg) cell responses; however, little is known about DCs that drive inflammation in the intestine. Here, we show that monocyte-derived inflammatory DCs that express E-cadherin, the receptor for CD103, promote intestinal inflammation. E-cadherin+ DCs accumulated in the inflamed mesenteric lymph nodes and colon, had high expression of toll-like receptors, and produced colitogenic cytokines, such as IL-6 and IL-23, after activation. Importantly, adoptive transfer of E-cadherin+ DCs into T cell-restored immunodeficient hosts increased Th17 cell responses in the intestine and led to exacerbation of colitis. These results identify a monocyte-derived inflammatory DC subset that is associated with the pathogenesis of intestinal inflammation, providing a therapeutic target for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.



The intestine is a unique microenvironment that must constantly maintain a delicate balance between effector and tolerogenic T cell responses because inadequate protective immunity may result in opportunistic infections, whereas aberrant reactions against the commensal flora may trigger chronic intestinal pathologies, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (Xavier and Podolsky, 2007).
Dendritic cells (DCs) are specialized antigen-presenting cells that play a pivotal role in shaping the host's immune response (Steinman et al., 2003). Several types of DCs have been described according to their origin, location, receptor expression, and functional characteristics. Secondary lymphoid organs contain both conventional resident and migratory DCs, but the relative functional contribution of these subsets in controlling tissue immunity is poorly understood (Geissmann et al., 2008). In addition, monocyte-derived DCs accumulate in infected tissue sites where they promote protective innate and adaptive responses (León et al., 2007; Nakano et al., 2009; Salazar-Gonzalez et al., 2006; Serbina et al., 2003).
Alterations in intestinal DCs are thought to contribute to the effector pathways that lead to IBD. Both in human Crohn's patients and in murine colitis models, pathology is associated with the local accumulation of activated DCs (Hart et al., 2005; Uhlig et al., 2006b). In colitic mice, mesenteric lymph node (MLN) DCs express elevated amounts of CD40 and CD134L, and blockade of either the CD40-CD40L (Uhlig et al., 2006b) or the CD134-CD134L (Malmström et al., 2001) pathway inhibits colitis, illustrating that DCs promote colitogenic responses. However, which particular DC subsets contribute to chronic T cell-mediated colitis is not known.
Precisely how DCs within the same tissue can drive both tolerance and immunity is poorly understood. One hypothesis is that these distinct functions are performed by different DC subsets, which may be segregated both temporally and spatially within the tissue in order to maintain both homeostasis and rapid protective responses upon demand. We and others have previously identified a functionally distinct population of DCs that are enriched within the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) and which express the integrin α chain CD103 (αE) (Johansson-Lindbom et al., 2005). In earlier studies, we found that regulatory T (Treg) cells were unable to suppress colitis in hosts that lacked CD103, indicating a functional role for CD103+ DCs in maintaining gut homeostasis (Annacker et al., 2005). Furthermore CD103+, but not CD103−, MLN DCs were able to promote the differentiation of Treg cells, suggesting a role for this population in the support of both conventional and antigen-induced Treg cells in the GALT (Coombes et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2007). Recent elegant studies have shown that the two major populations of CD11chi DCs in the intestine have distinct origins. Thus, CD103+CX3CR1− DCs arise from the common DC progenitor (CDP) via a pre-DC intermediate, whereas CD103−CX3CR1+ DCs develop from Gr1hi monocytes (Bogunovic et al., 2009; Varol et al., 2009). Developmental differences may therefore account for the distinct functional features of CD103+ and CD103− DC subsets in the GALT.
To date, only one ligand of CD103 has been identified, which is E-cadherin (Cepek et al., 1994). E-cadherin is a single-span transmembrane glycoprotein that, as well as binding to CD103, also undergoes homotypic interactions that form the core of intercellular tight junctions (Takeichi, 1991). Consequently, E-cadherin has a central role in the maintenance of tissue architecture and early embryonic development (Larue et al., 1994). Although it is widely acknowledged that E-cadherin is a marker of nonhematopoietic intestinal epithelial cells (IECs), E-cadherin is also expressed by bone marrow-derived DCs (BM-DCs) (Jiang et al., 2007), keratinocytes (Tang et al., 1993), and Langerhans cells (LCs) (Riedl et al., 2000). Recently, it has been demonstrated that E-cadherin-stimulated DCs promote Treg cells and that the E-cadherin-β-catenin signaling pathway may be involved in the acquisition of an immunosuppressive DC phenotype in vitro (Jiang et al., 2007). The distribution and function of E-cadherin+ DCs in vivo is not known.
Here, we have identified and characterized a population of E-cadherin+ DCs that accumulates within the intestine and GALT during T cell-mediated colitis. Our results suggest that E-cadherin+ DCs represent an inflammatory monocyte-derived DC population that can promote chronic pathological inflammatory responses in the gut.

E-Cadherin Is Expressed by a Minor Population of CD11chi DCs in Normal Mice
E-cadherin has been shown to be expressed primarily by nonhematopoietic IECs, but there are exceptions, including LCs and BM-DCs (Jiang et al., 2007; Riedl et al., 2000). We first analyzed whether E-cadherin was expressed by DCs in secondary lymphoid tissue. Tissues were harvested, and CD11c-enriched cell suspensions were prepared and subject to flow cytometry analysis. To focus on DCs, cells were gated on the high-forward and side-scatter cell population, which removed the majority of CD11c− cells, and 7-AAD+ dead cells were excluded. E-cadherin expression among the CD11chiMHC class IIhi population was examined. This gating strategy was applied to all experiments unless otherwise stated (Figure S1A available online). We found that a minor population of CD11chi cells in the MLN, axillary LN (ALN), and spleen of normal mice expressed E-cadherin (Figure S1B). E-cadherin+CD11chi cells from the MLN expressed similarly high amounts of MHC class II, and the costimulatory molecules CD80, CD86, and CD40 as the reciprocal E-cadherin−CD11chi population, and, hence, displayed the phenotypic characteristics of DCs (Figure S1C). E-cadherin+CD11chi cells did not express Gr1, and they were heterogeneous for CD8α and CD11b, indicative of a mixed DC population. The majority of E-cadherin+ DCs at steady state also expressed CD103 (Figure S1D).

E-Cadherin+ DCs Accumulate during T Cell-Mediated, but Not Innate, Colitis
We have previously shown that intestinal inflammation is characterized by an accumulation of activated DCs within the GALT (Malmström et al., 2001). However, very little is known about the role of specific DC subsets in chronic T cell-mediated intestinal inflammation. To further investigate this, we used the T cell transfer model of colitis, where transfer of CD4+CD45RBhi T cells to immunodeficient hosts leads to mucosal and systemic inflammation. In this model, colitis was associated with a more than 10-fold increase in the frequency of E-cadherin+ DCs in the colon and MLN compared to unreconstituted Rag2−/− control mice (Figures 1B and 1C), and a more than 3-fold increase in the frequency of E-cadherin+ DCs compared to WT mice (Figure S2A). Changes in frequency did not reflect the loss of another subset because there were also large increases in the total number of E-cadherin+ DCs in the inflamed MLN and colon (Figure 1D). E-cadherin+ DCs in the MLN and colon may derive from a blood precursor because E-cadherin+CD11cint cells were present in the blood of colitic, but not normal, uninflamed mice (Figure S2A). CD4+CD25+ Treg cells are known to inhibit colitis and maintain intestinal homeostasis (Read et al., 2000) (Figure 1A). In mice protected from colitis by Treg cells, there was no accumulation of E-cadherin+ DCs above those found in the GALT of unreconstituted Rag2−/− mice (Figures 1C and 1D). Quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis confirmed DC E-cadherin expression at the mRNA level (Figure S2B).
To assess the role of T cell-derived signals in the accumulation of E-cadherin+ DCs, we utilized an anti-CD40 model of innate colitis. In this model, injection of an agonistic CD40 mAb leads to focal colitis with a large accumulation of activated DCs in the MLN and colon. We found that approximately 85% of MLN and 50% of colonic DCs expressed E-cadherin (Figure 1E). By contrast, despite a large systemic and intestinal inflammatory response, Helicobacter hepaticus-induced innate colitis was not associated with an increase in the frequency of E-cadherin+ DCs in either the GALT or spleen (Figure 1F). Together, these data indicate that the accumulation of E-cadherin+ DCs is linked to T cells and that the provision of a CD40 signal alone is sufficient to drive accumulation of E-cadherin+ DCs.

Phenotypic Characterization of E-Cadherin+ DCs during Intestinal Inflammation
Phenotypic characterization showed that during colitis, the majority of MLN and colon E-cadherin+ DCs were CD103−CD11b+CD8α−Gr1− (Figure 2A). Under inflammatory conditions, E-cadherin+ DCs did not express CCR7 (Figures 2B and 2C), suggesting that these cells may enter the MLN directly from the blood (Jang et al., 2006).

To investigate the lineage relationship of E-cadherin+ DCs t