Mesenchymal stem cells from umbilical cord matrix, adipose tissue and bone marrow exhibit different capability to suppress peripheral blood B, natural killer and T cells.


Introduction
The ability to self-renew, be easily expanded in vitro and differentiate into different mesenchymal tissues, render mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) an attractive therapeutic method for degenerative diseases. The subsequent discovery of their immunosuppressive ability encouraged clinical trials in graft-versus-host disease and auto-immune diseases. Despite sharing several immunophenotypic characteristics and functional capabilities, the differences between MSCs arising from different tissues are still unclear and the published data are conflicting.


Methods
Here, we evaluate the influence of human MSCs derived from umbilical cord matrix (UCM), bone marrow (BM) and adipose tissue (AT), co-cultured with phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (MNC), on T, B and natural killer (NK) cell activation; T and B cells’ ability to acquire lymphoblast characteristics; mRNA expression of interleukin-2 (IL-2), forkhead box P3 (FoxP3), T-bet and GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3), on purified T cells, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), perforin and granzyme B on purified NK cells.


Results
MSCs derived from all three tissues were able to prevent CD4+ and CD8+ T cell activation and acquisition of lymphoblast characteristics and CD56dim NK cell activation, wherein AT-MSCs showed a stronger inhibitory effect. Moreover, AT-MSCs blocked the T cell activation process in an earlier phase than BM- or UCM-MSCs, yielding a greater proportion of T cells in the non-activated state. Concerning B cells and CD56bright NK cells, UCM-MSCs did not influence either their activation kinetics or PHA-induced lymphoblast characteristics, conversely to BM- and AT-MSCs which displayed an inhibitory effect. Besides, when co-cultured with PHA-stimulated MNC, MSCs seem to promote Treg and Th1 polarization, estimated by the increased expression of FoxP3 and T-bet mRNA within purified activated T cells, and to reduce TNF-α and perforin production by activated NK cells.


Conclusions
Overall, UCM-, BM- and AT-derived MSCs hamper T cell, B cell and NK cell-mediated immune response by preventing their acquisition of lymphoblast characteristics, activation and changing the expression profile of proteins with an important role in immune function, except UCM-MSCs showed no inhibitory effect on B cells under these experimental conditions. Despite the similarities between the three types of MSCs evaluated, we detect important differences that should be taken into account when choosing the MSC source for research or therapeutic purposes.




Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotential non-hematopoietic stem cells that possess the ability to self-renew and to differentiate in response to chemical, hormonal or structural stimuli into different lineages of mesenchymal tissues, such as osteocytes, chondrocytes, neurocytes and adipocytes [1-7]. MSCs can be isolated from adult tissues, such as bone marrow, adipose tissue, endometrial polyps, menstrual blood and so on [2], and from fetal tissues, such as placenta, umbilical cord blood and matrix [8,9]. Their ability to differentiate into different tissues is variable according to their tissue of origin [4]. Bone marrow is the traditional source of human MSCs; however, there they represent a rare population of approximately 0.001% to 0.01% of total nucleated cells and their frequency tends to decline with increasing age [9-12]. Although adult MSCs have the ability to expand in culture while retaining their growth and multilineage potential [13], compared with MSCs from fetal sources, they undergo fewer cell divisions before they reach senescence [4].
All MSCs seem to share a significant number of characteristics, even if isolated from different sources: they are plastic adherent, exhibit a fibroblast-like morphology, express certain cell-surface markers (CD90, CD73 and CD105) and are distinguished from hematopoietic precursor cells and leukocytes by lacking CD34, CD45, CD14 and HLA-DR expression [3,4,14,15]. MSCs secrete several cytokines, growth factors and extracellular matrix molecules that play an important role in the regulation of hematopoiesis, angiogenesis and in immune and inflammatory response [8]. Other interesting characteristics are that MSCs can migrate and home to tissues and organs in response to growth factors, cytokines, chemokines or adhesion molecules and, therein, mediate immunomodulatory actions [10,14,16-18]. Moreover, due to their multipotency, MSC are a very attractive choice for clinical applications in several immune disorders, such as arthritis, encephalomyelitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and in regenerative diseases, including diabetes and skin grafting [8,10,13,16,19]. Their low immunogenicity, immunomodulatory capacity and ability to differentiate into cells that