Efficient and versatile manipulation of the peripheral CD4+ T-cell compartment by antigen targeting to DNGR-1/CLEC9A.

DC NK lectin group receptor-1 (DNGR-1, also known as CLEC9A) is a C-type lectin receptor expressed by mouse CD8α+ DC and by their putative equivalents in human. DNGR-1 senses necrosis and regulates CD8+ T-cell cross-priming to dead-cell-associated antigens. In addition, DNGR-1 is a target for selective in vivo delivery of antigens to DC and the induction of CD8+ T-cell and Ab responses. In this study, we evaluated whether DNGR-1 targeting can be additionally used to manipulate antigen-specific CD4+ T lymphocytes. Injection of small amounts of antigen-coupled anti-DNGR-1 mAb into mice promoted MHC class II antigen presentation selectively by CD8α+ DC. In the steady state, this was sufficient to induce proliferation of antigen-specific naïve CD4+ T cells and to drive their differentiation into Foxp3+ regulatory lymphocytes. Co-administration of adjuvants prevented this induction of tolerance and promoted immunity. Notably, distinct adjuvants allowed qualitative modulation of CD4+ T-cell behavior: poly I:C induced a strong IL-12-independent Th1 response, whereas curdlan led to the priming of Th17 cells. Thus, antigen targeting to DNGR-1 is a versatile approach for inducing functionally distinct CD4+ T-cell responses. Given the restricted pattern of expression of DNGR-1 across species, this strategy could prove useful for developing immunotherapy protocols in humans.



Regulating the T-cell compartment is the principal function of DC and therefore, manipulation of DC offers great promise for immune intervention 1, 2. Numerous studies have focused on the therapeutic potential of ex-vivo-generated DC that are subsequently infused into patients 2. An alternative approach consists of Ab-mediated targeting of antigens to endocytic receptors expressed by DC in vivo 3, 4. In mice, this method can elicit powerful cellular and humoral responses, beneficial in models of cancer or infection 5–11. Conversely, it can also lead to antigen-specific tolerance, useful for limiting autoimmune diseases or allograft rejection 5, 8, 12–14. Whether antigen targeting to DC results in tolerance or immunity depends on the nature of the targeting Ab, antigen dose, co-administered adjuvants, immunological readout used to measure response, and importantly, the receptor used for targeting 3, 4. Ideally, the latter should be restricted in expression to DC to allow for focused antigen delivery, and should additionally be capable of mediating endocytosis of bound Ab–antigen conjugates and delivering these to antigen processing pathways. In addition, a versatile receptor for antigen targeting should be “neutral” in that its targeting by antibodies should not result in overwhelming delivery of signals that instruct DC to prime particular types of immune responses. Antigen targeting to such “neutral” receptors can then be combined with defined immunomodulators to favor specific immune outcomes, ranging from immunological tolerance to different kinds of immunity.
DC comprise multiple subsets that may be specialized to perform distinct and, sometimes, opposing functions 15, 16. Thus, another consideration in targeting approaches is whether it might be preferable to direct antigens to a single DC subset or to multiple subtypes. Of the large panel of endocytic surface molecules tested as targeting receptors to date, many are expressed by multiple DC subsets and by other populations of hematopoietic and/or non-hematopoietic cells 3, 4. In search for receptors restricted in expression to specific DC subsets, we identified a novel endocytic C-type lectin receptor that we named DC NK lectin group receptor-1 (DNGR-1) 9, 17, 18. In mice, DNGR-1 (also known as CLEC9A) is expressed at high level by the CD8α+ subset and at low level by plasmacytoid DC (pDC) 9, 17, 18. In our studies, mouse DNGR-1 was not detected on other leukocytes, although others have reported low levels of expression on a subset of B cells 17. Interestingly, DNGR-1 expression is also very restricted to DC in human PBMC as it is detected almost exclusively on lineage-negative BDCA-3+ cells 9, 17, 18, a subtype of DC proposed to constitute the functionally equivalent of the mouse CD8α+ DC population 19. DNGR-1 binds to an unidentified ligand(s) exposed in necrotic cells and is involved in crosspresentation of dead-cell-associated antigens 20. In line with this role, we found that antigens targeted to mouse DNGR-1 via antibodies were efficiently crosspresented by CD8α+ DC to CD8+ T cells 9, 17. Notably, when given with adjuvants, anti-DNGR-1 antigen conjugates induce effective CTL responses that protect mice from tumor challenge in both prophylactic and therapeutic settings 9.
It has recently been shown by Caminschi et al. that antigen targeting to DNGR-1 can additionally promote MHC class II presentation and T-cell-dependent Ab production 17. In contrast to CTL priming 9,