Viral persistence redirects CD4 T cell differentiation toward T follicular helper cells.

Persistent virus infection drives follicular T helper cell differentiation.


During persistent infection, virus-specific T cells are either physically deleted or persist in an “exhausted” state, which is characterized by the decreased ability to lyse virally infected cells, proliferate, and produce the antiviral and immune stimulatory cytokines IL-2, TNF, and IFN-γ (Gallimore et al., 1998; Zajac et al., 1998; Wherry et al., 2003; Brooks et al., 2005). It is the culmination of these deficiencies that ultimately prevents viral clearance, leading to persistent infection. T cell exhaustion is observed during many persistent viral infections, including HIV and hepatitis B and hepatitis C virus infection in humans and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection in mice, indicating that prolonged viral replication institutes a similar T cell differentiation program (Klenerman and Hill, 2005). Interestingly, persistent LCMV infection is eventually controlled from the periphery ∼60–80 d after infection via CD8 T cell– and B cell–dependent mechanisms, both of which are regulated by CD4 T cells (Battegay et al., 1994; Matloubian et al., 1994; Zajac et al., 1998; Ciurea et al., 2001; Bergthaler et al., 2009). Consequently, effective CD4 T cell responses are required for the ultimate resolution of persistent LCMV infection (Battegay et al., 1994; Matloubian et al., 1994). However, it is unclear how exhausted CD4 T cells are able to sustain diverse immune cell types.
Depending on the level of TCR stimulation and the composition of co-stimulatory and inflammatory signals, CD4 T cells differentiate into a variety of helper subsets that in turn orchestrate diverse immune responses. We have previously demonstrated that priming and initial CD4 T cell activation is similar after acute and persistent LCMV infection, indicating that exhaustion is not a programmed event, but rather a continual response to the antigenic environment (Brooks et al., 2006a), and raising the question as to how differentiation is altered during persistent infection. CD4 T cells continue to help CD8 T cells during persistent viral infection, allowing continued control over virus replication (Elsaesser et al., 2009; Fröhlich et al., 2009; Yi et al., 2009). Although the role of CD8 T cells and their differentiation pathways have been extensively analyzed in acute and persistent viral infection (Kaech et al., 2002; Wherry et al., 2007), CD4 T cell differentiation and the mechanisms that govern it are largely uncharacterized. Recently, we and others identified IL-21 as a critical component of CD4 T cell help during viral persistence (Elsaesser et al., 2009; Fröhlich et al., 2009; Yi et al., 2009). CD8 T cells require IL-21 to maintain residual levels of immunological function, avoid deletion, and resolve persistent infection. IL-21 is also important for stimulating germinal center (GC) B cells and antibody production (Ozaki et al., 2002; Linterman et al., 2010; Zotos et al., 2010), suggesting that CD4 T cells differentiate into a subset capable of providing help to both B cells and CD8 T cells during persistent viral infection.
Given that ongoing antiviral immune responses continually exert control over virus replication throughout persistent infection and that CD4 T cells play an integral role in this process, we sought to define how viral persistence impacts CD4 T cell differentiation such that it is capable of maintaining antiviral immunity in the face of prolonged periods of viral replication. Herein, we establish that the prolonged antigenic stimulation during viral persistence drives a specific CD4 T cell developmental program leading to the progressive differentiation of T follicular helper cells. These CD4 T cells continue to function during viral persistence to sustain antiviral antibody production and to ultimately control persistent virus replication. Thus, we demonstrate that CD4 T cells are not without function during viral persistence, but instead that their developmental program is redirected from promoting memory T and B cell differentiation after acute viral infection and toward a T helper subset that sustains multiple immune parameters to fight persistent viral infection.

Persistent viral infection drives progressive CD4 T follicular helper (Tfh) cell differentiation
Different environmental cues institute distinct CD4 T helper cell developmental programs. To delineate how viral persistence affects CD4 T helper cell differentiation, C57BL6 mice were infected with either LCMV-Armstrong (Arm) or LCMV-Clone 13 (Cl 13). LCMV-Arm generates an acute infection that is cleared primarily by CD8 T cells within 8–10 d and generates memory T cells. LCMV-Cl 13 induces a persistent infection characterized by the attenuation of CD4 and CD8 T cells, but is eventually resolved from most peripheral tissues via CD4 T cell, CD8 T cell, and B cell dependent mecha