Harnessing Mechanistic Knowledge on Beneficial Versus Deleterious IFN-I Effects to Design Innovative Immunotherapies Targeting Cytokine Activity to Specific Cell Types.

Type I interferons (IFN-I) were identified over 50 years ago as cytokines critical for host defense against viral infections. IFN-I promote anti-viral defense through two main mechanisms. First, IFN-I directly reinforce or induce de novo in potentially all cells the expression of effector molecules of intrinsic anti-viral immunity. Second, IFN-I orchestrate innate and adaptive anti-viral immunity. However, IFN-I responses can be deleterious for the host in a number of circumstances, including secondary bacterial or fungal infections, several autoimmune diseases, and, paradoxically, certain chronic viral infections. We will review the proposed nature of protective versus deleterious IFN-I responses in selected diseases. Emphasis will be put on the potentially deleterious functions of IFN-I in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection, and on the respective roles of IFN-I and IFN-III in promoting resolution of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. We will then discuss how the balance between beneficial versus deleterious IFN-I responses is modulated by several key parameters including (i) the subtypes and dose of IFN-I produced, (ii) the cell types affected by IFN-I, and (iii) the source and timing of IFN-I production. Finally, we will speculate how integration of this knowledge combined with advanced biochemical manipulation of the activity of the cytokines should allow designing innovative immunotherapeutic treatments in patients. Specifically, we will discuss how induction or blockade of specific IFN-I responses in targeted cell types could promote the beneficial functions of IFN-I and/or dampen their deleterious effects, in a manner adapted to each disease.



Type I interferons (IFN-I) were the first cytokines discovered, over 50 years ago, based on their potent anti-viral effects (1, 2). IFN-I play a crucial, non-redundant role in vertebrate anti-viral defenses (3–5). IFN-I also mediate protective effects in other physiopathological contexts, including cancer (6) and multiple sclerosis (MS) (7). On the contrary, IFN-I responses can be deleterious in a number of circumstances, including bacterial or fungal infections (8–10), many autoimmune diseases (11), and, paradoxically, certain chronic viral infections (12–14). It is only recently that an integrated picture has emerged of the cellular and molecular mechanisms regulating the production of IFN-I and underlying their functions. Much knowledge was gained recently on another class of potent innate anti-viral interferons, the lambda, or type III IFNs (IFN-III). We will review knowledge on IFN-I/III (IFNs) and discuss how it could be harnessed to develop innovative therapeutic strategies aimed at surgically tuning IFN activity toward protective responses in a manner adapted to each disease. We will focus on IFN-α/β/λ because they are the best characterized IFNs and already used therapeutically. Recent reviews are covering information on other IFN-I subsets including IFN-ε, which is produced at mucosal sites and promotes local anti-viral defenses (15, 16).
Dendritic cells (DCs) are rare heterogeneous mononuclear phagocytes functionally characterized by their unique efficacy for antigen-specific activation of naïve T lymphocytes. DCs are sentinel cells of the immune system, able to sense and integrate a variety of danger input signals for delivery of output signals instructing the activation and functional polarization of effector immune cells. In mammals, five major DC subsets exist, which differ in their expression of innate immune recognition receptors (I2R2s) and in their functional specialization: monocyte-derived DCs (MoDCs), Langerhans cells, CD11b+ DCs, XCR1+ DCs, and plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) (17). A recurrent theme of this review will be the intricate relationships between IFNs and DCs, since these cells can be a major source and/or target of these cytokines under various conditions.
The first section will synthesize current knowledge on IFN production and protective anti-viral functions. The I2R2s and downstream signaling pathways responsible for IFN-I production during viral infection will be listed. The roles of different cell types for this function will be discussed. The two main mechanisms through which IFN-I promote anti-viral defense will be reviewed, succinctly for direct anti-viral effects and in greater details for immunoregulatory functions.
The second section will focus on the detrimental functions of IFN-I. Selected diseases will be discussed to illustrate how different, and sometimes opposite, processes underlie deleterious IFN-I responses depending on the physiopathological contexts. IFN-I induction of unbridled inflammatory responses causing lethal tissue damage will be discussed as a major pathological mechanism during bacterial encounters secondary to infl