Monocyte-derived dendritic cells promote T follicular helper cell differentiation.

To be effective, protein priming must induce the development of a distinct lineage of CD4+ T cells named T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, which regulate the differentiation of high-affinity memory B cells and long-lived plasma cells. In this context, we tested how adjuvantation with CpG, the Toll-like receptor 9 agonist used in clinics, contributes to antigen-specific T-cell-dependent B-cell responses in vivo. We found that addition of CpG to other vaccine adjuvant increased the differentiation of antigen-specific Tfh cells without changing the overall magnitude of the T-cell response. This phenomenon correlated with an enhancement of the germinal centre reaction, antigen-specific plasma cells and circulating antibodies. We comprehensively demonstrated that, in addition to the classical Tfh-cell differentiation mediated by conventional DC, the promoting effect due to CpG was orchestrated in vivo by antigen presentation and IL-6 secreted by monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DC) as shown in their absence. Thus, while conventional DC initiate T-cell responses, targeting monocyte-derived DC specifically enhances the Tfh programme needed to regulate high-affinity B-cell protection in vivo.



Most vaccines are designed empirically using attenuated pathogens as the source of foreign antigens (Ag). Improving vaccine efficacy has, however, proven difficult, mainly because the fundamental immune mechanisms of vaccine action remain elusive. Toll-like receptors (TLR) are innate immune receptors that specifically recognise pathogen challenges and are pivotal for initiating inflammation but also for the priming of adaptive immune responses (Banchereau & Steinman, 1998; Janeway & Medzhitov, 2002; Beutler et al, 2006). TLR ligands are thus widely used as vaccine adjuvants in different clinical settings (Klinman, 2004; Pulendran & Ahmed, 2011). Among them, CpG oligonucleotides (ODN) are recognised by TLR9, a sensor for hypomethylated CpG sequences such as found in DNA of bacterial or viral origin, and is localised to the endosomal membrane of B cells and dendritic cells (DC) (Klinman, 2004). Upon recognition of CpG, the intracellular adapter molecule myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) interacts and activates interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7), which is required for transcriptional activity of type I interferon (IFN). MyD88 engagement also leads to the activation of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), which in turn induces the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 and TNF-α.
Three distinct classes of synthetic CpG ODN exist based on their sequence and structure (phosphorothioate or mixed phosphodiester-phosphorothioate backbones): CpG-A, CpG-B and CpG-C (Krieg, 2002; Klinman, 2004). Depending on the type of CpG, the retention time in endosomes and the nature of endosomal compartments vary and result in either NF-κB or IRF-7 activation (Honda et al, 2005; Engel & Barton, 2010). Using a mouse model that lacks MyD88 selectively in DC or in B cells, soluble CpG-B has been shown to augment the T-cell-dependent antibody (Ab) response to protein selectively through DC (Hou et al, 2011). In contrast, the adjuvant activity of CpG-B on Ab response is dependent on MyD88 expression in B cells when CpG-B is delivered in virus-like particle (Hou et al, 2011) and CpG-B was shown to directly stimulate B cells to undergo isotype switching to IgG2a (Jegerlehner et al, 2007).
Protein vaccines promote long-term immunity through the differentiation of B-cell responses that are controlled in secondary lymphoid tissues by a distinct lineage of T-helper cells, named T follicular helper (Tfh) cells, through a combination of specific TCR-peptide-MHCII (pMHCII) interactions, engagement of co-stimulatory molecules and cytokine delivery (Fazilleau et al, 2009a; Crotty, 2011). It has been shown that IL-6, IL-21 and the strength of TCR binding promote in vivo Tfh-cell development that occurs preferentially in lymphoid organs draining the site of immunisation (Fazilleau et al, 2007, 2009b; Suto et al, 2008; Vogelzang et al, 2008). Recent studies have demonstrated that Bcl-6 is the master transcriptional regulator of Tfh-cell differentiation (Johnston et al, 2009; Nurieva et al, 2009; Yu et al, 2009). Among others, Bcl-6 induces the expression of the chemokine receptor CXCR5, which promotes Tfh-cell migration in CXCL13-rich areas where they regulate the outcome of the B-cell response (Forster et al, 1996; Fazilleau et al, 2009a). Additionally, while Tfh cells control B-cell maturation, interactions with B cells are reciprocally essential for Tfh-cell differentiation as shown with in vivo impairment of Tfh-cell development in the absence of T-B cooperation (Johnston et al, 2009; Nurieva et al, 2009).
Adjuvant combinations result in synergistic enhancement of the immune response. Notably, adjuvantation with CpG-B was shown to markedly increase Tfh- and B-