The Role of Lymphatic Niches in T Cell Differentiation.

Long-term immunity to many viral and bacterial pathogens requires CD8+ memory T cell development, and the induction of long-lasting CD8+ memory T cells from a naïve, undifferentiated state is a major goal of vaccine design. Formation of the memory CD8+ T cell compartment is highly dependent on the early activation cues received by naïve CD8+ T cells during primary infection. This review aims to highlight the cellularity of various niches within the lymph node and emphasize recent evidence suggesting that distinct types of T cell activation and differentiation occur within different immune contexts in lymphoid organs.



Successful development and maintenance of tissues within the body relies on the progeny of undifferentiated or less-differentiated stem cells within the population to maintain their lineage (Knoblich, 2008; Morrison and Kimble, 2006; Neumuller and Knoblich, 2009). During the early stages of development, cell division is characterized by the asymmetric segregation of cell fate determinants into daughter cells to promote cellular heterogeneity and differentiation through an evolutionarily conserved mechanism known as asymmetric cell division (ACD). For continuous survival and renewal, it is essential that parent cells retain their stemness after division and daughter cells integrate intrinsic and extrinsic cues from a highly regulated microenvironment referred to as a niche. Niches provide an intimate spatial association surrounded by highly cellular and vascularized stroma that produce extracellular matrix proteins, chemokines, and cytokines to maintain the environment and support cellular identity, survival, and division (Jones and Wagers, 2008). Cellular and chemical borders maintain the anatomy of the niche, and the expression of specific receptors and ligands coordinate interactions and functional processes. Stem cells interact with the niche through integrin-dependent contacts, receiving homeostatic, survival, and proliferation signals. Integrins play a key role in regulating stem cell homing, migration, and retention, as well as a close interaction with the support cells within the niches (Andressen et al., 1998; Benitah et al., 2005; Frye et al., 2003; Fuchs et al., 2004; Hirsch et al., 1996; Watt, 2002; Yang et al., 2015). Furthermore, integrins, specifically those containing a β1 subunit, can modify the axis of cell division in stem cells so that the two daughter cells are located in different microenvironments (Goulas et al., 2012; Gui and Homer, 2012; Metchat et al., 2015; Petridou and Skourides, 2016; Streuli, 2009; Watt, 2002), which has lasting implications for lineage determination.

The immune system is comprised of primary and secondary lymphoid organs. Both the thymus and the bone marrow are sites of immune cell origin, giving rise to the myeloid and lymphoid lineages. Development within and egress from these sites is dependent on several factors, including cell-cell interactions, cytokine and chemokine signals, and receptor expression level. Lymphoid organs support identity of undifferentiated cells during homeostasis, maintaining quiescence and multipotency, while also giving rise to differentiated cells capable of an immune response upon pathogenic challenge. The primary constituents of niches are stromal cells, providing integrin, chemokine, and cytokine cues. Both the thymus and the lymph node host a number of stromal cells that segregate into specific regions and create macroniches, guiding cell-cell interactions. Lymphatic niches must also stimulate activation, differentiation, and proliferation while retaining a subset of multipotent cells. A successful niche integrates signals to balance a cellular response with the needs of the organism, preventing depletion of low-frequency cells while restricting excessive expansion. Therefore, lymphatic niches must maintain a stable pool of cells poised for an immune response while tightly regulating quiescence and activation to avoid inappropriate immune responses and autoimmunity.
As primary sites of immune cell maintenance and initiation of immune responses the lymph nodes act as a niche for various immune cells. The lymphatic architecture can be divided into several regions both anatomically and functionally (von Andrian and Mempel, 2003). The outermost layer of the lymph node is the subcapsular sinus (SCS), where the afferent lymph enters the tissue and macrophages reside for access to soluble factors in the lymph (Berney et al., 1999; Carrasco and Batista, 2007; Junt et al., 2007; Kuka and Iannacone, 2014; Phan et al., 2007; 2009). Below this layer is the cortex, which can be divided into two regions – the follicular cortex (outer cortex) and the paracortex (inner cortex). The outer cortex, known as the B cell zone, is rich in B cells, CD4+ follicular T helper cells, and follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), while the paracortex, referred to as the T cell zone, includes