Inhibins Tune the Thymocyte Selection Process by Regulating Thymic Stromal Cell Differentiation.

Inhibins and Activins are members of the TGF-β superfamily that regulate the differentiation of several cell types. These ligands were initially identified as hormones that regulate the hypothalamus-pituitary-gonadal axis; however, increasing evidence has demonstrated that they are key regulators in the immune system. We have previously demonstrated that Inhibins are the main Activin ligands expressed in the murine thymus and that they regulate thymocyte differentiation, promoting the DN3-DN4 transition and the selection of SP thymocytes. As Inhibins are mainly produced by thymic stromal cells, which also express Activin receptors and Smad proteins, we hypothesized that Inhibins might play a role in stromal cell differentiation and function. Here, we demonstrate that, in the absence of Inhibins, thymic conventional dendritic cells display reduced levels of MHC Class II (MHCII) and CD86. In addition, the ratio between cTECs and mTECs was affected, indicating that mTEC differentiation was favoured and cTEC diminished in the absence of Inhibins. These changes appeared to impact thymocyte selection leading to a decreased selection of CD4SP thymocytes and increased generation of natural regulatory T cells. These findings demonstrate that Inhibins tune the T cell selection process by regulating both thymocyte and stromal cell differentiation.



Inhibins are members of the TGF-β superfamily that regulate different cellular functions including proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation of several cell types and play a role in the immune system (reviewed in [1]).
Activins and Inhibins were first described as hormones that regulate FSH release by the pituitary, either activating or inhibiting its release, respectively. One of the evidences that supported the role of Inhibins as antagonists of Activins was the fact that Inhibin α-subunit deficient mice (Inhα
−/−) develop gonadal tumors and cachexia with severe weight loss and liver necrosis [2, 3]. Some of the observed symptoms in Inhα
−/− appeared to correlate with the presence of high levels of serum Activin after 6 weeks of age [3]. However, growing evidence indicates that Inhibins do not always antagonize Activin-mediated functions, arguing in favor of a putative independent signaling pathway for Inhibins (reviewed in [4]).
Recent data has shown that Activins and Inhibins regulate the differentiation of several immune cell types including macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), and T cells (reviewed in [5, 6]). For example, Activin/Inhibin signaling has been shown to regulate DC functions in steady-state and inflammatory conditions through several mechanisms (reviewed in [5]). Interestingly, both Activin and Inhibin were shown to impair DC maturation in vitro, further arguing against the role of Inhibins as mere antagonists of Activin functions in immune cells [7].
T cell development is a highly regulated process that requires the close interaction between immature thymocytes and stromal thymic cells. Both cell-cell contact interactions and the presence of soluble mediators (cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors), mainly produced by stromal cells, regulate thymocyte differentiation and migration [8]. In the mouse, thymocyte development is initiated during fetal life with the arrival of lymphoid progenitors from the fetal liver that seed the thymic epithelial rudiment around day 11 of gestation (reviewed in [9]). After birth, bone marrow (BM) derived progenitors reach the thymus through blood vessels located at the corticomedullary junction [10]. The most immature thymocytes (DN or CD4−CD8− double negative) migrate outwards through the thymic cortex until they reach the subcapsular region (reviewed in [11, 12]). Pre-TCR signaling allows the differentiation of DN to the double positive stage (DP, CD4+CD8+), where expression of a functional TCR allows thymocytes to interact with self-peptide-Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) complexes expressed on cortical thymic epithelial cells (cTECs) and rescue them from apoptosis by the process of positive selection, while those thymocytes whose TCRs are unable to recognize self-peptide-MHC ligands die by neglect. Positively selected thymocytes migrate towards the medulla while they downregulate the CD4 or CD8 coreceptor, depending on the TCR specificity becoming CD4SP or CD8SP (SP, single positive) [13].
The thymic stroma consists of a heterogeneous population of epithelial and BM derived cells that provide the specific microenvironment required to support T cell differentiation in the thymus [12]. Among epithelial cells, cTECs and medullary epithelial cells (mTECs) are originated from a common bipotent precursor of endoderm origin which simultaneously expresses the cTEC marker CD205 and the mTEC regulator Receptor Activator of NF-κB (RANK) ([14] and reviewed in [15]). Among BM derived cells, DCs and macrophages are abunda