Id1 suppresses anti-tumour immune responses and promotes tumour progression by impairing myeloid cell maturation.

A central mechanism of tumour progression and metastasis involves the generation of an immunosuppressive ‘macroenvironment' mediated in part through tumour-secreted factors. Here we demonstrate that upregulation of the Inhibitor of Differentiation 1 (Id1), in response to tumour-derived factors, such as TGFβ, is responsible for the switch from dendritic cell (DC) differentiation to myeloid-derived suppressor cell expansion during tumour progression. Genetic inactivation of Id1 largely corrects the myeloid imbalance, whereas Id1 overexpression in the absence of tumour-derived factors re-creates it. Id1 overexpression leads to systemic immunosuppression by downregulation of key molecules involved in DC differentiation and suppression of CD8 T-cell proliferation, thus promoting primary tumour growth and metastatic progression. Furthermore, advanced melanoma patients have increased plasma TGFβ levels and express higher levels of ID1 in myeloid peripheral blood cells. This study reveals a critical role for Id1 in suppressing the anti-tumour immune response during tumour progression and metastasis.


A pivotal mechanism of tumour outgrowth and progression to metastatic disease involves the ability of tumours to use a complex set of immunosuppressive mechanisms that prevent the immune system from mounting an efficient anti-tumour response1. Defective differentiation of bone marrow (BM)-derived myeloid cells (BMDCs) occurring in response to circulating tumour-derived factors is thought to lie at the core of this systemic tumour-induced immunosuppression123. Many tumour-derived factors, including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-6, IL-13 and transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ), regulate redundant pathways likely related to myeloid cell differentiation45. In particular, these factors prevent the terminal differentiation of BMDCs into fully functional antigen-presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages67. Instead, tumour-derived factors redirect myeloid differentiation towards the accumulation and expansion of a heterogeneous population of immature myeloid cells called myeloid-derived suppressor cells or MDSCs189.
DCs are the most potent APCs that are able to recognize, acquire, process and present antigens to naive, resting T cells for the induction of an antigen-specific immune response10. Increasing evidence shows that the main DC pathway affected in cancer patients is the myeloid DC pathway, particularly post chemotherapy11. The consequences of decreased numbers of functionally competent DCs in tumour-bearing hosts are clear: a decline in APCs renders immunostimulation less effective67. In contrast, an increase in MDSCs can have a profound immunosuppressive effects through T-cell suppression351213.
MDSCs use a variety of antigen-specific and non-specific immunosuppressive mechanisms to suppress T-cell function, including increased arginase activity levels as well as nitric oxide and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production14151617. MDSCs have been found to accumulate in the circulation, lymphoid organs, primary and metastatic organs of most tumour models18, and in patients with various types of cancers including renal, breast and colorectal cancers192021. MDSCs are thought to contribute towards the limited effectiveness of cancer vaccines and other therapies, such as anti-VEGF treatment45. However, it currently remains unknown whether tumour-secreted factors drive an alternative developmental pathway that co-regulates the decline in DCs and expansion of MDSCs via the upregulation of common transcriptional regulators during tumour progression.
The Inhibitor of Differentiation 1 (Id1) is a member of a family of transcriptional regulators that prevent basic helix–loop–helix transcription factors from binding DNA2223. Increased Id1 protein expression in tumours has been shown to correlate with both cancer progression and poor prognosis2425. Furthermore, Id1 regulates endothelial cell differentiation and fosters tumour vasculogenesis2627, promotes progression from micro- to macrometastatic disease28 via endothelial progenitor cell mobilization and has been involved in myeloid development29303132. However, Id1 has not been previously involved in regulating the crosstalk between tumours and the host immune system at a systemic level and promoting tumour progression and metastasis via the suppression of myeloid cell differentiation.
In this study, we identify Id1 as a novel pivotal regulator of the switch from DC differentiation to MDSC expansion during tumour progression. We demonstrate that upregulation of Id1, primarily in response to tumour-derived TGFβ, redirects BMDC differentiation towards Id1-high expressing MDSCs with a reciprocal decrease in DC numbers. Id1 overexpression results in a systemic immunosuppressive phenotype that inhibits C