Immunogenicity is preferentially induced in sparse dendritic cell cultures.

We have previously shown that human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (DCs) acquired different characteristics in dense or sparse cell cultures. Sparsity promoted the development of IL-12 producing migratory DCs, whereas dense cultures increased IL-10 production. Here we analysed whether the density-dependent endogenous breaks could modulate DC-based vaccines. Using murine bone marrow-derived DC models we show that sparse cultures were essential to achieve several key functions required for immunogenic DC vaccines, including mobility to draining lymph nodes, recruitment and massive proliferation of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells, in addition to their TH1 polarization. Transcription analyses confirmed higher commitment in sparse cultures towards T cell activation, whereas DCs obtained from dense cultures up-regulated immunosuppressive pathway components and genes suggesting higher differentiation plasticity towards osteoclasts. Interestingly, we detected a striking up-regulation of fatty acid and cholesterol biosynthesis pathways in sparse cultures, suggesting an important link between DC immunogenicity and lipid homeostasis regulation.


Dendritic cells (DCs) represent a heterogeneous group of antigen presenting cells that play an essential role in the initiation of the adaptive immune responses through inducing naive T cell activation in secondary lymphoid tissues. However, several alternative fates of T cell differentiation can be promoted by DCs due to their own developmental divergence into functionally specialized subsets and due to an ability to fine-tune their functional repertoire in response to a variety of signals such as microbial compounds, cytokines or metabolites.
Various strategies have been developed to modulate antigen-specific immune responses with the help of ex vivo generated autologous DCs12. DC-based anticancer vaccines could potentially deliver tumour-associated antigens to lymphoid tissues and induce the activation of antigen-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells that can home to neoplastic lesions and mediate tumour regression. DC vaccines have been applied to more than 3000 patients suffering melanoma, prostate cancer, glioma or renal cell cancer and the results of these studies indicated increased median survival in most vaccinated cohorts1. However, only a small proportion of treated individuals displayed detectable tumour regression and discordance has been frequently noted between immunological and clinical responses with detectable tumor-specific immune responses often contributing to little impact on the overall disease burden1.
The small number of individuals who respond favourably to DC vaccinations indicates the need for developing more immunogenic DC vaccines and to dissect the reasons underlying the highly variable clinical responses. Previous findings have highlighted several mechanisms that contributed to DC vaccine efficiency including higher IL-12 production34, efficient co-stimulatory signals5, stronger induction of antigen-specific TH1 responses678 or lower regulatory T cell numbers in the tumor tissue69. Other parameters, such as the site of injection, the number of injected DCs or the number of DCs reaching the T cell zone of lymph nodes are also critical for DC vaccine efficiency101112. It has been shown that only a small fraction of the injected DCs reach the draining lymph node101112 and increasing DC mobility improved survival in gliobastoma patients13.
Interestingly, a significant heterogeneity in DC cell surface markers and functional characteristics has been detected not only in vivo but also among ex vivo generated DCs. Coexisting CD1a+CD14− and CD1a−CD14low populations developed from blood monocytes in presence of GM-CSF and IL-4 or from CD34+ hematopoietic progenitors cultured with GM-CSF and Flt3-L, and these two DC subsets presented unique functional characteristics1415. In particular, the CD1a+CD14− population was superior in inducing TH1 polarization and cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) killer activity as compared to the CD1a−CD14low counterpart. Importantly, the CD1a+/CD1a− DC ratio varied greatly among blood donors, suggesting that a developmental heterogeneity might influence immunogenicity in individual DC vaccine preparations14.
We have recently described a cell concentration-dependent differentiation switch in DC cultures, which further contributed to the diversity of DC phenotypes in vitro. By increasing cell concentration in the early phase of development we reduced CCR7-dependent chemotaxis and the ability to induce TH1 responses in human monocyte-derived DCs (MoDCs) and we observed elevated IL-10 production1617. Such effects could potentially compromise the ability of DC vaccines to induce immunity against cancer or pathogens, however; further in vivo experiments are necessary to understand whether the density-dependent endogenous breaks could influence DC-based therapies.
In 