CD4+ T cell effector commitment coupled to self-renewal by asymmetric cell divisions.

Nish et al. report that production of a fully committed Th1 effector cell occurs during an asymmetric cell division wherein the other daughter cell remains memory cell–like. Unequal transmission of metabolic signaling may be the driver of this regenerative behavior.



Upon infection, CD4+ T cells differentiate into short-lived effector cells as well as long-lived memory cells that mount responses upon re-exposure to the microbe. CD4+ T cells have the ability to differentiate into multiple effector subsets including T helper 1 cells (Th1 cells). The Th1 subset is defined by expression of the lineage-determining transcription factor T-bet and the capacity to secrete the effector molecule IFN-γ (Zhu et al., 2010). Th1 cells migrate to the site of microbial entry to exert their function (Swain et al., 2012). After the contraction phase, wherein the vast majority of effector cells undergo apoptosis, a small portion of cells persist in the host as memory T cells to combat future infections. Memory T cells can be divided into different subsets based on distinct effector function and homing capacity (Sallusto et al., 1999; Masopust et al., 2001; Reinhardt et al., 2001). One population of memory cells called central memory cells share similar features with naive T cells. They are characterized by expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7 and L-selectin (CD62L), circulate through secondary lymphoid organs, and have a less differentiated phenotype than bona fide effector cells. Upon rechallenge, they have the ability to regenerate differentiated effector cells in addition to self-renewing the central memory pool (Sallusto et al., 1999; Reinhardt et al., 2001; Zaph et al., 2004). In contrast, effector memory cells do not express CCR7 or CD62L and produce effector cytokines.
Using a variety of approaches, it has been suggested that a single T or B lymphocyte can generate progeny with intraclonal effector subclass diversity and memory cell renewal (Stemberger et al., 2007; Gerlach et al., 2010, 2013; Buchholz et al., 2013; Plumlee et al., 2013; Tubo et al., 2013, 2016; Graef et al., 2014; Becattini et al., 2015; Taylor et al., 2015). Whether cell-intrinsic, cell-extrinsic, stochastic, or deterministic mechanisms are responsible for the generation of intraclonal cell fate diversity of lymphocytes is an unresolved issue (Reiner and Adams, 2014). In this study, we have identified discrete stages of CD4+ T cell clonal selection distinguished by cell division, TCF1 expression, and anatomical localization. TCF1hi cells had a less differentiated phenotype, showed increased expression of CD62L, and homed to noninflamed secondary lymphoid organs within the initial cell divisions. TCF1hi cells from later divisions in the draining LNs (DLNs) had the capacity to asymmetrically self-renew while also generating PI3K-driven, TCF1lo Th1 effector cells. The Th1 cell–like, TCF1lo cells appeared incapable of reverting to central memory–phenotype cells and instead migrated to the site of infection. Some of the TCF1hi cells in the DLNs also appeared to be T follicular helper cell (Tfh cell)–like and noncirculating. These findings offer a potential mechanistic explanation for the seemingly hard-wired regeneration and functional diversity of CD4+ T cell clonal selection (Tubo et al., 2013, 2016; Becattini et al., 2015).

Early divergence of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells distinguished by TCF1 expression, cell division, and anatomical location
TCF1 is a key regulator of T cell development in the thymus (Germar et al., 2011; Weber et al., 2011). In the periphery, TCF1 has been shown to be a negative regulator of effector cell and a positive regulator of memory cell CD8+ responses (Jeannet et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2010; Thaventhiran et al., 2013; Tiemessen et al., 2014). To examine the expression of TCF1 in CD4+ T cell responses, we used influenza viral infection, in which the primary activation of responding CD4+ T cells (mediastinal LNs) is anatomically distinct from the site of Th1 effector function (lung tissue). OTII T cells were labeled with a cell proliferation dye (CPD) and adoptively transferred into Thy1 disparate recipient mice, which were subsequently infected intranasally with a recombinant strain of PR8 influenza virus expressing a peptide epitope of OVA recognized by the OTII TCR (hereafter referred to as PR8-OVA). TCF1 expression was examined in the dividing antigen-specific OTII T cells in the LNs draining the site of infection (mediastinal LNs and DLNs), the nondraining LNs (NDLNs), and the lungs on day 4 after infection (Fig. 1 A).

Early divergence of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells distinguished by TCF1 expression, cell division, and anatomical location. (A) Purified OTII+ CD4+ T cells were labeled with a CPD and transferred into congenically disparate mice that were infected with PR8-OVA influenza virus. CPD versus TCF1 