Immunosurveillance by human γδ T lymphocytes: the emerging role of butyrophilins.

In contrast to conventional T lymphocytes, which carry an αβ T-cell receptor and recognize antigens as peptides presented by major histocompatibility complex class I or class II molecules, human γδ T cells recognize different metabolites such as non-peptidic pyrophosphate molecules that are secreted by microbes or overproduced by tumor cells. Hence, γδ T cells play a role in immunosurveillance of infection and cellular transformation. Until recently, it has been unknown how the γδ T-cell receptor senses such pyrophosphates in the absence of known antigen-presenting molecules. Recent studies from several groups have identified a unique role of butyrophilin (BTN) protein family members in this process, notably of BTN3A1. BTNs are a large family of transmembrane proteins with diverse functions in lipid secretion and innate and adaptive immunity. Here we discuss current models of how BTN molecules regulate γδ T-cell activation. We also address the implications of these recent findings on the design of novel immunotherapeutic strategies based on the activation of γδ T cells.



T lymphocytes are the specific effector cells of the adaptive immune system. T-cell differentiation takes place in the thymus, giving rise to large numbers of mature CD4 and CD8 T cells expressing a clonally variable αβ T-cell receptor (TCR). Interaction with thymic stromal cells, transcription factors, and cytokines together drive the differentiation of early thymic progenitor cells into mature CD4 and CD8 αβ T cells which recognize peptides presented in the context of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I (CD8 T cells) or class II (CD4 T cells)
1. The functional diversification of mature T cells into T helper type 1 (Th1), Th2, and Th17 cells and memory cell subsets is induced by the context-dependent interaction with neighboring cells (e.g. dendritic and epithelial cells) and transcriptional networks which are further modulated by metabolic and epigenetic processes
5. In addition to these “conventional” T cells, T cells with a highly restricted canonical αβ TCR repertoire exist which recognize non-peptide antigens in the absence of restriction by classical MHC molecules. Such “unconventional” human αβ T cells include the invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells expressing a Vα24-Jα18-encoded TCR and the mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells expressing a Vα7.2-Jα33-encoded TCR. iNKT cells recognize endogenous and exogenous (microbial) lipids presented by CD1 (specifically CD1d) molecules, whereas MAIT cells recognize small intermediates generated in the riboflavin (vitamin B2) metabolic pathway which are presented by the MHC-related 1 (MR1) molecules
6. Since unconventional αβ T cells are not dependent on the antigen processing machinery like conventional CD4 and CD8 T cells, they can rapidly perform effector functions upon ligand recognition. Both iNKT and MAIT cells are found in the blood and at increased numbers not only in mucosal tissue but also in the liver and are important players in local immunosurveillance and anti-bacterial immunity
8. More recently, innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) have been identified as innate homologs of differentiated effector T cells which do not express clonally rearranged TCR but share similar transcription factor and cytokine specifications
9. Subsets of ILCs interact with innate and adaptive immune cells, epithelial cells, and microbiota and thereby contribute to tissue repair, metabolic homeostasis, and local inflammation
While it might appear that the above outlined arsenal of available immune cells should suffice to combat all dangerous (infectious and non-infectious) antigens, evolution has conserved yet another class of unconventional T cells, i.e. T lymphocytes carrying a CD3-associated γδ TCR heterodimer rather than the αβ TCR. It has been known for a long time that the major population of γδ T cells found in the peripheral blood of adults specifically recognizes non-peptidic small microbial pyrophosphate molecules, again without requirement for a dedicated MHC class I, MHC class II, or CD1 presenting molecule
13. It thus remained a mystery for many years how such “phosphoantigens” (pAg) contained in crude bacterial lysates
A landmark paper addressing the activation requirements of human γδ T cells in response to pAg was published in 2012 by Harly and co-workers
17. These authors reported the unexpected finding that a member of the transmembrane butyrophilin (BTN) proteins was absolutely required for the activation of human γδ T cells by microbial or endogenous pAg. On the grounds of these findings, several groups set out to study the precise role of BTN proteins at the molecular level. Surprisingly, these investigations resulted in quite controversial models, assigning an essential role to either the extracellular
19 of a particular BTN3A isoform. In this review, we discuss the current knowledge on th