Transient expression of ZBTB32 in anti-viral CD8+ T cells limits the magnitude of the effector response and the generation of memory.

Virus infections induce CD8+ T cell responses comprised of a large population of terminal effector cells and a smaller subset of long-lived memory cells. The transcription factors regulating the relative expansion versus the long-term survival potential of anti-viral CD8+ T cells are not completely understood. We identified ZBTB32 as a transcription factor that is transiently expressed in effector CD8+ T cells. After acute virus infection, CD8+ T cells deficient in ZBTB32 showed enhanced virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses, and generated increased numbers of virus-specific memory cells; in contrast, persistent expression of ZBTB32 suppressed memory cell formation. The dysregulation of CD8+ T cell responses in the absence of ZBTB32 was catastrophic, as Zbtb32-/- mice succumbed to a systemic viral infection and showed evidence of severe lung pathology. We found that ZBTB32 and Blimp-1 were co-expressed following CD8+ T cell activation, bound to each other, and cooperatively regulated Blimp-1 target genes Eomes and Cd27. These findings demonstrate that ZBTB32 is a key transcription factor in CD8+ effector T cells that is required for the balanced regulation of effector versus memory responses to infection.



The anti-viral CD8+ T cell response has been the topic of intense investigation over recent years, beginning with early ground-breaking studies demonstrating that, at early times post-infection, effector cells destined to die could be distinguished from those destined to populate the long-lived memory pool [1]. Molecular analysis of these subsets has revealed complex networks of transcription factors regulating the numbers, the phenotypes, and the survival potential of antiviral CD8+ T cells in models of both acute and chronic infections [2–4]. Contributing to this complexity, lineage-tracing experiments showed that the clonal responses of individual CD8+ T cells activated in vivo exhibited dramatic heterogeneity, and further, that this heterogeneity was already apparent at early times post-infection [5,6]. These studies also showed an inverse correlation between T cell family size at the peak of the response and the expression of memory T cell markers. Furthermore, mathematical modeling of these data indicated a linear pattern of differentiation with memory precursor cells arising first, undergoing limited proliferation, followed by a small number of these cells undergoing massive expansion to comprise the majority of the terminal effector population. Single-cell RNA-seq data have elaborated on these findings, identifying subpopulations of activated CD8+ T cells that show effector-like and memory-like gene expression profiles that can be seen as early as the first cell division [7].
While the source of the variability in clonal T cell responses is not currently known, one likely possibility is a variation in local concentrations of antigen and inflammatory cytokines, as these signals have been shown to regulate the magnitude of antiviral CD8+ T cell responses and the generation of memory cells [8–12]. Thus, transcription factors that are upregulated by a combination of TCR and inflammatory cytokine signals would be likely candidates to contribute to the regulation of clonal T cell responses. One such transcription factor is Blimp-1 (encoded by Prdm1), which has a critical role in promoting the terminal differentiation of CD8+ effector T cells [13,14]. We have recently shown that Blimp-1 acts as an epigenetic regulator and enhances the numbers of short-lived effector cells, while suppressing the development of memory-precursor CD8+ T cells [15]. Here we identify a second transcription factor, ZBTB32/ROG, as being rapidly upregulated in anti-viral CD8+ T cells in a TCR- and inflammatory cytokine-dependent manner. ZBTB32 belongs to the POK (Poxviruses and Zinc-finger (POZ) and Krüppel) family of proteins, most of which are transcriptional repressors, such as PLZF (Promyelocytic leukemia Zn finger protein) and BCL6 (B cell lymphoma-6) [16]. ZBTB32 is expressed in T and B cells upon activation [17–22], and has been shown to inhibit IL-4 gene activation by recruiting histone deacetylase (HDAC) 1 and 2 [19]. Zbtb32-deficient CD4+ T cells showed enhanced proliferation and cytokine production following in vitro stimulation [18,20,21]. Consistent with this, overexpression of ZBTB32 in BDC2.5 CD4+ T cells suppressed T cell proliferation and cytokine production [23]. Zbtb32-deficient CD8+ T cells were found to have enhanced responses to MCMV infection, whereas the opposite effect was observed in NK cells responding to the infection [24]. In addition, studies of plasma cell differentiation suggested that ZBTB32 and Blimp-1 form a complex to regulate the Ciita and H2 genes during this process [22]. Recently, ZBTB32 was shown to be a negative regulator of memory B cell recall responses