T Cell Calcium Signaling Regulation by the Co-Receptor CD5.

Calcium influx is critical for T cell effector function and fate. T cells are activated when T cell receptors (TCRs) engage peptides presented by antigen-presenting cells (APC), causing an increase of intracellular calcium (Ca2+) concentration. Co-receptors stabilize interactions between the TCR and its ligand, the peptide-major histocompatibility complex (pMHC), and enhance Ca2+ signaling and T cell activation. Conversely, some co-receptors can dampen Ca2+ signaling and inhibit T cell activation. Immune checkpoint therapies block inhibitory co-receptors, such as cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed death 1 (PD-1), to increase T cell Ca2+ signaling and promote T cell survival. Similar to CTLA-4 and PD-1, the co-receptor CD5 has been known to act as a negative regulator of T cell activation and to alter Ca2+ signaling and T cell function. Though much is known about the role of CD5 in B cells, recent research has expanded our understanding of CD5 function in T cells. Here we review these recent findings and discuss how our improved understanding of CD5 Ca2+ signaling regulation could be useful for basic and clinical research.



T cells are a critical component of the adaptive immune system. T cell responses are influenced by signals that modulate the effects of the T cell receptor (TCR) and peptide-major histocompatibility complex (pMHC) interaction and initiate the transcription of genes involved in cytokine production, proliferation, and differentiation [1,2,3]. T cell activation requires multiple signals. First, the TCR engages the pMHC leading to tyrosine phosphorylation of CD3 and initiation of the Ca2+/Calcineurin/Nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) or Protein kinase C-theta (PKCθ)/Nuclear factor-κ-light chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) or Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase)/AP-1 pathways [4,5,6]. Second, cell surface costimulatory molecules, such as co-receptor CD28, amplify TCR-pMHC complex signals and promote stronger intracellular interactions to prevent T cell anergy [7,8]. Finally, cytokines such as interleukin-12 (IL-12), interferon α (INFα), and interleukin-1 (IL-1) promote T cell proliferation, differentiation, and effector functions [6].
Co-receptors such as CD4 and CD8 interact with MHC molecules and additional co-receptors interact with surface ligands present on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to regulate T cell homeostasis, survival, and effector functions with stimulatory or inhibitory signals [9]. Altering co-receptor levels, balance, or function dramatically affects immune responses and their dysfunction is implicated in autoimmune diseases [10]. Stimulatory co-receptors such as CD28, inducible T cell co-stimulator (ICOS), Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 9 (TNFRSF9 or 4-1BB), member of the TNR-superfamily receptor (CD134 or OX40), glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor (GITR), CD137, and CD77 promote T cell activation and protective responses [11]. Co-receptor signaling is initiated by the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues located in immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) or immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs) [7,12]. The phosphorylated tyrosines serve as docking sites for spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) family members such as zeta-chain-associated protein kinase 10 (ZAP-70) and Syk which activate the phospholipase C γ (PLCγ), RAS, and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathways in addition to mobilizing intracellular Ca2+ stores [13]. 
One of the best described T cell co-receptors, CD28, is a stimulatory T cell surface receptor from the Ig superfamily with a single Ig variable-like domain which binds to B7-1 (CD80) and B7-2 (CD86) [2]. Ligand binding phosphorylates CD28 cytoplasmic domain tyrosine motifs such as YMNM and PYAP and initiates binding and activation of phosphatidylinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) which interacts with protein kinase B (Akt) and promotes T cell proliferation and survival [1]. CD28 also activates the NFAT pathway and mobilizes intracellular Ca2+ stores through association with growth factor receptor-bound protein 2 (GRB2) and the production of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), the substrate of PLCγ1, respectively [2,14]. Blocking stimulatory co-receptors suppresses T cell effector function. For example, blocking stimulatory CD28 with anti-CD28 antibodies promotes regulatory T cell function and represses activation of auto- and allo-reactive T effector cells after organ transplantation [8,15].
T cells also have inhibitory co-receptors which regulate T cell responses [8]. The best characterized are immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily members cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) [8,16]. CTLA-4 binds CD80 and CD86 with greater avidity than CD28, and its inhibitory role refines early phase activation si