MiR‐16 regulates mouse peritoneal macrophage polarization and affects T‐cell activation.

Abstract
MiR‐16 is a tumour suppressor that is down‐regulated in certain human cancers. However, little is known on its activity in other cell types. In this study, we examined the biological significance and underlying mechanisms of miR‐16 on macrophage polarization and subsequent T‐cell activation. Mouse peritoneal macrophages were isolated and induced to undergo either M1 polarization with 100 ng/ml of interferon‐γ and 20 ng/ml of lipopolysaccharide, or M2 polarization with 20 ng/ml of interleukin (IL)‐4. The identity of polarized macrophages was determined by profiling cell‐surface markers by flow cytometry and cytokine production by ELISA. Macrophages were infected with lentivirus‐expressing miR‐16 to assess the effects of miR‐16. Effects on macrophage–T cell interactions were analysed by co‐culturing purified CD4+ T cells with miR‐16‐expressing peritoneal macrophages, and measuring activation marker CD69 by flow cytometry and cytokine secretion by ELISA. Bioinformatics analysis was applied to search for potential miR‐16 targets and understand its underlying mechanisms. MiR‐16‐induced M1 differentiation of mouse peritoneal macrophages from either the basal M0‐ or M2‐polarized state is indicated by the significant up‐regulation of M1 marker CD16/32, repression of M2 marker CD206 and Dectin‐1, and increased secretion of M1 cytokine IL‐12 and nitric oxide. Consistently, miR‐16‐expressing macrophages stimulate the activation of purified CD4+ T cells. Mechanistically, miR‐16 significantly down‐regulates the expression of PD‐L1, a critical immune suppressor that controls macrophage–T cell interaction and T‐cell activation. MiR‐16 plays an important role in shifting macrophage polarization from M2 to M1 status, and functionally activating CD4+ T cells. This effect is potentially mediated through the down‐regulation of immune suppressor PD‐L1.



Macrophages, with the capabilities of phagocytosis, antigen presentation, tissue remodelling and the secretion of a variety of molecules including growth factors, cytokines, enzymes, complement components and prostaglandins are important players in both innate and adaptive immune systems 1. Under a steady‐state or in response to inflammation, monocytes extravasate from the circulation, differentiate and mature into either dendritic cells (DCs) or macrophages 2. Mouse macrophages are characterized and distinguished from DCs by the positive expression of surface markers F4/80 and CD11b, and intracellular antigen CD68 3. When monocyte precursors exit the circulation, depending on the local microenvironment, macrophages may undergo separate differentiation pathways and generate two states of polarized activation: classically activated macrophages (M1) and alternatively activated macrophages (M2) 4, 5. These two subsets of macrophages are associated with their own in vitro differentiation inducers, cell‐surface markers, secretion of cytokines and other molecules, interaction with T‐cell subsets and subsequent functional consequences 6. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and Th1 cytokine interferon (IFN)‐γ drive macrophage polarization towards M1 phenotypes in vitro, which are characterized by the surface expression of CD86 and CD16/32, the secretion of pro‐inflammatory cytokines tumour necrosis factor (TNF)‐α, interleukin (IL)‐12 and IL‐23, the up‐regulation of chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10, and the enhanced activity of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) that stimulates NO production from macrophages. Functionally, M1 macrophages are key effector cells for antigen‐specific Th1 and Th17 cellular immune responses. In contrast, M2 macrophages are differentiated in response to Th2 cytokine IL‐4, featuring the surface expression of mannose receptor (CD206), arginase 1 (Arg‐1) and Dectin‐1, the secretion of anti‐inflammatory cytokines IL‐10 and IL‐1RA, and the up‐regulation of chemokines CCL17, CCL22 and CCL24. Functionally, M2 macrophages are mainly involved in immunosuppression and tissue repair 7, 8. As a major type of infiltrating leucocytes associated with solid tumours, tumour‐associated macrophages (TAMs) play an important role in tumour immunity; featuring a IL‐10high IL‐12low phenotype similar to M2 macrophages and presenting potent immunosuppressive functions 5. Consistently, the predominant expression of M2 macrophages is associated with the advanced stage of tumour progression, which promotes the idea of treating cancer by the repolarization of macrophages from the immunosuppressive M2 phenotype to the pro‐inflammatory M1 phenotype 9. The polarization to M1 or M2 macrophages are highly dynamic and plastic to external signals such as the cytokine environment 10. However, intracellular mechanisms regulating macrophage polarization plasticity remains to be elucidated.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small (21–25 nucleotides in length) non‐coding RNA molecules that control gene expression at post‐tr