Tangeretin has anti-asthmatic effects via regulating PI3K and Notch signaling and modulating Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokine balance in neonatal asthmatic mice.

Asthma is a chronic allergic disease characterized by airway inflammation, airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR), and mucus hypersecretion. T-lymphocytes are involved in the pathogenesis of asthma, mediating airway inflammatory reactions by secreting cytokines. The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and Notch signaling pathways are associated with T cell signaling, proliferation, and differentiation, and are important in the progression of asthma. Thus, compounds that can modulate T cell proliferation and function may be of clinical value. Here, we assessed the effects of tangeretin, a plant-derived flavonoid, in experimental asthma. BALB/c mice at postnatal day (P) 12 were challenged with ovalbumin (OVA). Separate groups of mice (n=18/group) were administered tangeretin at 25 or 50 mg/kg body weight by oral gavage. Dexamethasone was used as a positive control. Tangeretin treatment reduced inflammatory cell infiltration in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and also restored the normal histology of lung tissues. OVA-specific IgE levels in serum and BALF were reduced. AHR, as determined by airway resistance and lung compliance, was normalized. Flow cytometry analyses revealed a reduced Th17 cell population. Tangeretin reduced the levels of Th2 and Th17 cytokines and raised IFN-γ levels. PI3K signaling was inhibited. The expressions of the Notch 1 receptor and its ligands Jagged 1 and 2 were downregulated by tangeretin. Our findings support the possible use of tangeretin for treating allergic asthma.



Asthma, an airway inflammatory disease, is common, chronic, and increasing in prevalence. It is associated with an extensive array of symptoms that include mucus hypersecretion, airway hyper-responsiveness (AHR), and airway remodeling (1). T lymphocytes play major roles in airway inflammation and remodeling through cytokines (2). Th2 cytokines (IL-4, IL-5, IL-13) induce allergen-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) E production and inflammatory mediator release from mast cells (2). IFN-γ, secreted by Th1 cells, suppresses Th2 immune responses. Class switching is induced by IL-4 in IgG1 and IgE, whereas IFN-γ is associated with IgG2 α class switching (3). Thus, Th1/Th2 cytokine stability is an important measure in the assessment of asthma (3).
Th17 cells, a subset of T lymphocytes, have been reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of several immune-mediated disorders and also in asthma (4). Th17 cells release several cytokines, including IL-17, IL-6, TNF-α, and IL-22. IL-17 induces eosinophil infiltration and the recruitment of macrophages (5) in asthma models. Studies have shown an increase in Th17 cells in airway inflammation in asthma (6). Thus, regulation of Th17 cells could be of benefit in asthma therapy.
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) is a major enzyme involved in cell proliferation, differentiation, and cell signaling. On activation, PI3K activates its effector protein Akt, that in turn affects several down-stream targets as mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK3β). PI3K/Akt pathway is negatively regulated by phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) (7). PI3K is widely distributed in lung tissue and plays an important role in T cell signaling (8). In particular, PI3K activation in T cells promotes survival (9) and cell cycle progression (10), modulates differentiation and controls the acquisition of effector and memory phenotypes (11). The pathway critically influences the inflammatory response of the airway (12). Thus, inhibitors of PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway can interfere with T cell activation and function, and would be beneficial in inflammatory disorders. Herrero-Sánchez et al. (13) reported that the targeted inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway effectively suppressed T cell activation and prevented graft-versus-host disease development.
The Notch signaling pathway is also involved in T cell activation and differentiation (14). Dysregulation of Notch signaling may induce human disorders such as asthma. Pharmacological inhibitors of Notch signaling can regulate Th1 and Th2 cell-mediated inflammatory responses, reducing allergic pulmonary inflammation (15). Notch signaling regulates retinoic acid-related orphan receptor γt, an important transcription factor in Th17 differentiation (16). Thus, inhibition of Notch signaling may be beneficial to treat asthma, and compounds that regulate PI3K signaling may be of therapeutic value.
In this study, we assessed the anti-asthmatic effects of tangeretin, an O-polymethoxylated flavone found in tangerine and other citrus fruits. Tangeretin exhibits significant anti-cancer, anti-oxidant and anti-proliferative, activities (17). Studies have reported that tangeretin inhibits inflammatory responses by inhibiting NF-κB activation and pro-inflammatory cytokines as interleukins (IL-1β) and tumor necro