The human lymph node microenvironment unilaterally regulates T-cell activation and differentiation.

The microenvironment of lymphoid organs can aid healthy immune function through provision of both structural and molecular support. In mice, fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) create an essential T-cell support structure within lymph nodes, while human FRCs are largely unstudied. Here, we show that FRCs create a regulatory checkpoint in human peripheral T-cell activation through 4 mechanisms simultaneously utilised. Human tonsil and lymph node–derived FRCs constrained the proliferation of both naïve and pre-activated T cells, skewing their differentiation away from a central memory T-cell phenotype. FRCs acted unilaterally without requiring T-cell feedback, imposing suppression via indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase, adenosine 2A Receptor, prostaglandin E2, and transforming growth factor beta receptor (TGFβR). Each mechanistic pathway was druggable, and a cocktail of inhibitors, targeting all 4 mechanisms, entirely reversed the suppressive effect of FRCs. T cells were not permanently anergised by FRCs, and studies using chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells showed that immunotherapeutic T cells retained effector functions in the presence of FRCs. Since mice were not suitable as a proof-of-concept model, we instead developed a novel human tissue–based in situ assay. Human T cells stimulated using standard methods within fresh tonsil slices did not proliferate except in the presence of inhibitors described above. Collectively, we define a 4-part molecular mechanism by which FRCs regulate the T-cell response to strongly activating events in secondary lymphoid organs while permitting activated and CAR T cells to utilise effector functions. Our results define 4 feasible strategies, used alone or in combinations, to boost primary T-cell responses to infection or cancer by pharmacologically targeting FRCs.



Stromal cells create specialised lymphoid support compartments within secondary lymphoid organs. The signals they feed leukocytes have profound effects in many aspects of activation, proliferation, and differentiation [1].
Fibroblastic reticular cells (FRCs) construct the internal segregated structure of secondary lymphoid organs by acting as a scaffold for lymphocyte migration and secreting chemokine C-C motif ligand 19 (CCL19) and chemokine C-C motif ligand 21 (CCL21) to bring T cells and dendritic cells to the central T-cell zone and chemokine C-X-C motif ligand 13 (CXCL13) to bring B cells to outer B cell zones. Lymphocyte survival is further supported through secretion of survival factors interleukin 7 (IL-7) and B cell activating factor (BAFF) [2,3].
Several papers demonstrated that mouse lymph node–derived FRCs reduce T-cell proliferation. In mice, when T cells have been activated less than 15 h, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2)-driven prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is suppressive [4], while comparative neutralisation experiments showed that nitric oxide plays a larger role past 15 h, when most T-cell division occurs [5–7]. T-cell function is impaired, shown through reduced interferon gamma (IFNγ) production [6–7]. Effects on memory T-cell differentiation have not been assessed in mice.
Human FRCs are still almost entirely unstudied, though it has been shown that podoplanin (PDPN+) cells analogous to mouse FRCs are found in human secondary lymphoid organs and that they secrete extracellular matrix components as well as CCL21 [8,9]. A recent study, citing as-yet unpublished data, said that human FRCs do not produce nitric oxide in response to IFNγ activation [9]. We therefore questioned whether prior mouse FRC research accurately modelled human FRC biology. The effects of FRCs on human T cells are unknown, and their mechanism/s of action have not been tested, though COX2 is expressed [4,9].
The role of human FRCs in T-cell regulation is likely to be highly relevant to human health. Mouse studies show far-reaching effects of FRCs for immunity against influenza and other pathogens [3,10,11], and it is hypothesised that suppression of effector T-cell activation within lymph nodes reduces immune-mediated pathology against the lymph node structure [1,12]. Accordingly, virally infected FRCs are associated with T-cell persistence and chronic viral infection [12].
Here, we show that human FRCs block proliferation and modulate differentiation of newly activated naïve human T cells, without requiring T-cell feedback. Suppression was constitutive, and we identified 4 molecular mechanisms operating simultaneously: indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), COX1 and 2 enzymes responsible for PGE2 production, adenosine 2A receptor (A2AR), and transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ). Coinhibition of these factors reversed FRC-mediated suppression in vitro and permitted us to observe T-cell activation on a living tonsil slice.
It is important to first understand the key cells and molecules involved in regulating T-cell activation during inflammatio